The Project Gutenberg eBook of Regulations for the establishment and government of the Royal Military Asylum
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Regulations for the establishment and government of the Royal Military Asylum

Author: Duke of York's Royal Military School

Release date: May 16, 2013 [eBook #42717]

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1805 T. Egerton edition by David Price. Many thanks to the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea Library for allowing their copy to be used for this transcription


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REGULATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND GOVERNMENT OF THE ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM ***


Transcribed from the 1805 T. Egerton edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to the Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea Library for allowing their copy to be used for this
transcription.





                               REGULATIONS
                                 FOR THE
                              ESTABLISHMENT
                                   AND
                                GOVERNMENT
                                  OF THE
                          ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM.


                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 London:
                          PRINTED FOR T. EGERTON
                            MILITARY LIBRARY,
                                WHITEHALL.

                                * * * * *

                                  1805.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                       C. Mercier and Co. Printers,
                       No. 6, Northumberland-court.




WARRANT, CONTAINING ORDERS AND REGULATIONS, REGARDING THE ESTABLISHMENT
AND GOVERNMENT OF THE ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM.


GEORGE R.

WHEREAS OUR Commissioners for the Affairs of Our Royal Military Asylum
did, in pursuance of Our Commands, signified to them in Our Warrant
bearing date the 24th June, 1801, prepare and present to Us, in their
Report, dated the 30th day of April, 1803, certain Orders and Regulations
for the good Government of Our said Asylum, and for the attainment of the
humane objects for which it has been erected; and did, in the same
Report, propose such an Establishment of Officers, as they deemed
necessary, in the first instance, to be appointed in Our said Asylum,
together with the Salaries and Allowances fitting to be annexed to their
respective employments; of which Report, in all its parts, WE were
pleased to approve: And Whereas divers additional Regulations and
Appointments of Officers have at different times since been represented
to Us by Our Commander in Chief, at the request of Our said
Commissioners, to be essential to the welfare of the Institution; and
have in like manner met with Our Royal Approbation: WE do, therefore,
confirm hereby the several Acts which have been done or directed by Our
said Commissioners, in conformity to Our said Warrant, and to the Report
and Representations afore mentioned: and, in regard to the Commissioners
for managing the Affairs of Our Royal Military Asylum, as well as to the
Regulations for the Establishment and Government of the same, in future,
WE do declare Our Will and Pleasure, to be as follows:

OUR most dearly beloved Son, Field Marshal, Frederic, Duke of York and
Albany, Commander in Chief of all Our Forces in Our United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland; Our most dearly beloved Son, General, Edward,
Duke of Kent; Our most dearly beloved Son, Lieutenant General, Ernest
Augustus, Duke of Cumberland; Our most dearly beloved Son, Lieutenant
General, Adolphus Frederic, Duke of Cambridge;

General, Charles, Earl of Harrington, Colonel of Our First Regiment of
Life Guards; Brownlow, Bishop of Winchester; Lieutenant General, William,
Lord Cathcart, Colonel of Our Second Regiment of Life Guards; Our right
trusty and well beloved, William Windham, and Our right trusty and well
beloved, Charles Yorke, late, respectively, Secretaries at War; General,
Sir David Dundas, Knight of the Bath, Governor of Our Royal Hospital at
Chelsea; Lieutenant General, George Hewett, Barrack Master General to Our
Forces; Major General, Robert Brownrigg, Quarter Master General of Our
Forces; Major General, Harry Calvert, Adjutant General of Our Forces; Sir
Brook Watson, Baronet, Our Commissary General of Stores and Provisions in
Great Britain; the Reverend John Gamble, Chaplain General of Our Forces;
and Matthew Lewis, Esq. late Deputy Secretary at War;

Together with,

The General Commanding in Chief Our Forces in the United Kingdom, for the
time being; Our Secretary at War; Our Bishops of London and Winchester;
the Paymaster General of Our Land Forces; Our Master General of the
Ordnance; Our Quarter Master General; Our Adjutant General; Our Barrack
Master General; Our Inspector General of the Recruiting Service; the
Governor, and Lieutenant Governor, of Our Royal Hospital, at Chelsea; the
Colonels of Our Two Regiments of Life Guards; Our Judge Advocate General;
Our Commissary General of Stores and Provisions in Great Britain; the
Chaplain General of Our Forces; and Our Deputy Secretary at War; _All for
the Time being_; shall be Commissioners for the Government of our Royal
Military Asylum, and for the Direction, Management, and Control, of all
Affairs belonging thereto.

And, it is Our Royal Pleasure, that Our Commander in Chief for time being
shall be the President, and Our Secretary at War for the time being shall
be the Vice-President, of Our said Royal Military Asylum.

WE do hereby Grant to Our several Commissioners above specified, or any
Five or more of them, forming a Board, (of whom Our Commander in Chief,
Secretary at War, Paymaster General, Quarter Master General, Adjutant
General, or Governor of Chelsea Hospital, shall always be One) full Power
and Authority generally to do, perform, and direct, all such Matters and
Things, as They, in their Discretion, shall judge expedient, for the due
Government and Maintenance of Our said Asylum; subject to such further
Orders, Regulations, and Instructions, as WE shall at any time or times
hereafter think fit to give under Our Royal Sign Manual, in relation to
Our said Asylum, and to the Government thereof.

Four Quarterly, or General, Boards shall be holden in each Year; viz. on
the 1st Tuesday in the Months of January, April, July, and October, or as
soon thereafter as may be; of which the Secretary shall give due notice
to each Commissioner, one Week, at the least, preceding each Board.

At those Quarterly Boards the general business of the Institution shall
be transacted: such as the Appointment or Removal of Officers, not
holding their Employments by Commission from Us; the Authorising and
Approving of Contracts; the Examining and Settling of all Accounts; and
the consideration of the necessary Applications, from time to time, to
Parliament, for the Sums required in Support of the Institution.

A Committee (open to all Commissioners, but at which, Three of those
specially named by the General Board shall always be present) shall meet
as often as occasion may require to receive Reports; to determine on the
reception, or rejection, of Children recommended for admittance into the
Asylum, under such Restrictions and Regulations as shall have been
previously prescribed by Our Commissioners at any General Board; and to
give directions in all Matters respecting the interior Economy of the
Institution: and whenever such Committee may find it expedient, it is to
direct the Secretary to Summon a Special General Board of Commissioners,
at any intermediate time between the Quarterly Boards.

In the selection or the Children for admission, preference in general
shall be given,

1st.  To Orphans.

2nd.  To those, whose Fathers have been killed; or have died on Foreign
Service.

3d.  To those who have lost their Mothers, and whose Fathers are absent
on Duty abroad.

4th.  To those whose Fathers are ordered on Foreign Service; or, whose
Parents have other Children to maintain.

The merit of the Father, as to Regimental Character, shall be always
considered as a principal recommendation.

None shall be admitted, except the Children, born in Wedlock, of Warrant
and Non-commissioned Officers and Soldiers of Our Regular Army.

Every Child, previously to admission, must be ascertained to be entirely
free from mental, and bodily, infirmity.

The Parents, or Friends, applying for the admission of Children, shall be
required to sign their consent to such Children remaining in the Asylum
as long as Our Commissioners may think fit; and to their being disposed
of, when of proper Age, at the discretion of the Commissioners, as
Apprentices, or Servants; or, if Boys, to their being placed, with their
own free consent, in Our Regular Army, as Private Soldiers.

The number of Children to be admitted shall not exceed One Thousand; viz.
Seven hundred Boys, and Three hundred Girls; exclusive of such as, upon
any pressure of special circumstances, may be received (for a time, and
until they are of proper Age to be removed, or until vacancies may occur
in the Asylum) into the infant Establishment in the Isle of Wight; hereby
declared to be a Branch of this Our Royal Institution, and to be under
the general control of the Commissioners thereof.

The following shall be the Officers, Assistants, and Servants, on the
Establishment of Our Royal Military Asylum; subject to such further
change, augmentation, or diminution, in the description, number, or
Salaries, of the under Officers, Assistants, and Servants, as to Our said
Commissioners may hereafter appear necessary: viz.



A COMMANDANT;


To whom, in consideration of the great trust reposed in Him, and the
continued attention required of Him to promote the general welfare of the
Institution, WE are pleased to assign the Pay of Twenty Shillings per
Diem, with an Allowance of Coals and Candles for three Rooms.



A TREASURER;


To whom WE are pleased to Grant a Salary of £.300 per Annum, including
all Allowances for Clerks, Stationary, or otherwise.



A CHAPLAIN, AND SUPERINTENDANT OF MORALS AND EDUCATION;


To whom WE are pleased to Grant a Salary of £.280 per Annum, with an
Allowance of Coals and Candles for two Rooms and an half.



AN ADJUTANT AND SECRETARY;


To whom WE are pleased to Grant the Pay of Ten Shillings per Diem, with
an Allowance of Coals and Candles for two Rooms.



A QUARTER MASTER AND STEWARD;


To whom WE are pleased to Grant a Salary of £.180 per Annum, with an
Allowance of Coals and Candles for two Rooms.



A SURGEON;


Who, holding the Rank of Surgeon to Our Forces, shall have the Pay of
Fifteen Shillings per Diem, with an Allowance of Coals and Candles for
two Rooms and an half—he shall have the Assistance of an Hospital Mate,
(not Resident in the House) at Five Shillings per Diem, without any other
Allowance.



A SERJEANT-MAJOR OF INSTRUCTION;


Whose Pay shall be Two Shillings and Sixpence per Diem, with Clothing;
Board, the same as the Children; and an Allowance of Coals and Candles
for one Room.



SERJEANT-ASSISTANTS;


In the proportion of One to every Fifty Boys; they shall have the Pay of
One Shilling and Sixpence per Day, each; Clothing and Board; and an
Allowance of Coals and Candles, according to the Season of the Year, in a
proportion to be fixed by Our Commissioners.

To the Quarter-Master Serjeant, and to such of the Serjeant-Assistants as
shall be employed to instruct the Boys in the different Trades, WE are
pleased to allow Sixpence per Diem, each; in addition to the Pay of One
Shilling and Sixpence above specified.



A DRUMMER;


To be allowed Drummer’s Pay and Clothing, and to Mess with the Children.



A MATRON;


Who shall have £.100 per Annum as Salary, and in lieu of all former
Allowances; except in regard to Coals and Candles, the Allowance for
which shall be continued to her for two Rooms.



AN ASSISTANT MATRON AND SCHOOLMISTRESS;


Who is to have a Salary of £.50 per Annum, (in lieu of her former Salary,
and Allowance for Provisions) together with an Allowance of Coals and
Candles for one Room.



ONE READING MISTRESS, AND ONE KNITTING MISTRESS AND SEMPSTRESS;


Each having a Salary of £.25 per Annum, One Shilling per Diem in lieu of
Board, and an Allowance of Coals and Candles for one Room.



NURSES,


In the proportion of One to each Ward; to be allowed £.10 per Annum,
each, and their Board; with Clothing, and Coals and Candles, the same as
the Serjeant-Assistants.



NURSES FOR THE INFIRMARY,


In proportion to the number of the Sick; to be allowed £.12 per Annum,
each, and their Board; with Clothing, and Coals and Candles, as the other
Nurses.



A COOK;


To be allowed £.20 per Annum, and her Board; with Clothing, and an
Allowance of Coals and Candles, the same as the Nurses.  She shall be
allowed two Assistants; each having £.10 per Annum; with Board, Clothing,
and Coals and Candles, the same as the Cook.



A LAUNDRESS;


To be allowed £.20 per Annum, and her Board; with Clothing, and an
Allowance of Coals and Candles, the same as the Cooks; and to have such
Aid from the Female Children, and such hired Assistance, as circumstances
may from time to time require.



A SERJEANT-PORTER;


Who shall have the Pay of One Shilling and Sixpence per Day; with
Clothing, and One Shilling per Diem in lieu of Board: together with an
Allowance of Coals and Candles, in a proportion to be fixed by Our
Commissioners.

                                * * * * *

The Officers, Assistants, and Servants, belonging to Our Royal Military
Asylum, shall not, directly or indirectly, demand or receive any
Perquisite; or any Emolument whatever, beyond the Pay and Allowances
annexed to their respective Employments, as specified in this Our
Warrant, or otherwise expressly authorized by Our Commissioners: and any
such Officers, Assistants, or Servants, offending herein, shall be deemed
to have forfeited their Situations.

WE do hereby Grant unto the Commissioners of Our Royal Military Asylum,
or any Five or more of them, assembled at a General Board as aforesaid,
full Power and Authority to Nominate, Constitute, and Appoint, from time
to time, the said Officers, Assistants, and Servants, and to displace
them, or any of them, as to Our said Commissioners shall seem meet: The
Commandant, Chaplain, Adjutant and Secretary, Quarter-Master and Steward,
and Surgeon, excepted; who, receiving Commissions from Ourselves, shall
not be removable, unless by Our especial Command.

WE do further Grant hereby to Our said Commissioners, or any Five or more
of them, assembled as aforesaid, full Power and Authority to ascertain
and settle, what proportions and kinds of Victuals they shall judge most
expedient for the Diet of the Children, and of such other Persons as are,
in compliance with the above Regulations, to be entertained and fed in
Our Royal Military Asylum; and to make, or direct to be made, Contracts
and Agreements for the furnishing of the same, at such rates, and for
such periods, as to Our Commissioners shall appear best; as also, for
Clothing the said Children and Persons; and likewise, to cause the
Buildings, Furniture, Grounds, Roads, Walks, and Lights, belonging to Our
said Royal Military Asylum, to be maintained and kept in Repair and
proper Order, for the due Accommodation and good Government of the same.

WE do at the same time direct, and Command, that, in all cases
whatsoever, where any Order or Warrant is to be granted for the Payment
of any Sum or Sums of Money, for the uses of the Royal Military Asylum,
every such Order or Warrant shall be signed by Three or more of the
Commissioners; of whom Our Commander in Chief, Secretary at War,
Paymaster General, Quarter-Master General, Adjutant General, or Governor
of Chelsea Hospital, shall always be One.

WE are further pleased to declare all the Officers and Persons, borne on
the Establishment of Our Royal Military Asylum, to be subject to the
Authority, Command, and Control, of Our said Commissioners; who are
hereby empowered to make provision for the future disposal of the
Children, when of a proper Age to be removed from the Asylum; according
to their Qualifications, Ability, and Dispositions, and as may be most
likely to be conducive to their ultimate advantage.

FINALLY, WE are pleased to Approve the Instructions hereunto annexed,
which have been framed by Our said Commissioners for the more particular
guidance of the Officers, Assistants, and Servants, of the Royal Military
Asylum, in the execution of their respective Duties; And, WE do hereby
give to Our said Commissioners full Power and Authority, from time to
time, to amend or annul the same; and to make such further Rules and
Institutions, touching the ordinary Affairs of Our said Asylum, as shall
not, in any case, be repugnant to these our Orders and Regulations.

Given at Our Court at St. James’s, this 26th Day of April 1805, in the
Forty-fifth Year of Our Reign.

                                                 By His Majesty’s Command,
                                                                W. DUNDAS.




REGULATIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF THE OFFICERS, ASSISTANTS, AND SERVANTS,
OF THE ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM, IN THE EXECUTION OF THEIR RESPECTIVE
DUTIES.


DUTY OF THE COMMANDANT.


The Commandant must be Resident in the House; over the interior Economy
of which, He has a general Superintendence and Control.

All the Officers, Assistants, and Servants, are subject to his Orders;
and, as he is responsible for their Conduct, He is hereby invested with
Power to suspend (until the next meeting of the Committee) any of the
Officers not holding Commissions, Assistants, or Servants, whose
misconduct may deserve it.  It will be his Duty to Report to the
Committee all occurrences that may call for their attention; and He will
constantly exercise his utmost care and vigilance in promoting the
general Welfare of the Institution.

It is of essential consequence that all Payments should, as far as
practicable, be regularly made every Quarter, under the authority of the
General Board: But, as there will be many casual Disbursements, which
cannot be conveniently postponed to those Periods; the Treasurer will be
authorized by the Commissioners to advance to the Commandant, from time
to time, as they shall see occasion, such moderate Sums as they may deem
necessary for such Disbursements; and the Commandant will direct the
Quarter-Master and Steward to make those payments; to take proper
Receipts in the name of the Treasurer; to keep a regular Account of the
same: which Account (with the Receipts) shall be produced by the
Commandant every Quarter, for examination by the Committee, and for
confirmation by the Board.



DUTY OF THE TREASURER.


The Treasurer shall receive all Monies applicable to the purposes of this
Institution; and pay the same agreeably to such orders as the
Commissioners shall from time to time issue, in conformity to the
directions contained in His Majesty’s Warrant of this Date.

He is to produce Accompts Annually (with Vouchers in the Form approved by
the Commissioners) of all Monies by him received and expended for the
Royal Military Asylum; and, after his Accompts shall have been examined
and approved by the Commissioners, He shall finally pass the same,
according to the Practice observed in regard to the Accompts of other
Public Military Institutions.

He shall, at all times when required, furnish the Board, or Committee,
with a State of the Balance of Cash in his Hands; and with such other
Information as they may call for, respecting his Accompts as Treasurer of
this Institution.



DUTY OF THE CHAPLAIN AND SUPERINTENDENT OF MORALS AND EDUCATION.


The Chaplain is to be Resident in the House.  His Duty will be to read
Prayers twice, and Preach once, at least, every Sunday; and likewise on
Christmas Day, Good Friday, and every Public Fast, or Festival, that may
be directed by the Ordinary; and it is the positive order of the
Commissioners, that all the Officers, Assistants, and Servants, of the
Establishment, shall regularly attend Divine Service on Sundays, and on
the Public Fasts and Festivals.

The Chaplain is to examine the Children in the Church Catechism, and
instruct them in the meaning thereof, according to their capacities,
every Sunday; and to read Prayers to them on every Wednesday, and Friday
Morning.—He is also to be responsible for, and to have a general
Superintendence of, the Education of the Children; to take care that they
duly and reverently attend Public Worship; to reprove them for any
irregularities and vices, which he shall observe, or know them to be
guilty of; and, if they do not amend after admonition, he is to Report
their Behaviour in Writing to the Commandant.  It will likewise be his
Duty to have a watchful Eye over the Moral and Religious Conduct of the
Officers, Assistants, and Servants, of the Institution; and likewise to
visit frequently, and at uncertain times, the Schools, Workshops,
Refectories and Dormitories; and particularly to Report to the
Commandant, if He hear any Oaths or indecent Expressions made use of by
the Children, or by the under Officers, or Servants, of the Institution.
In fine, He shall in every respect, to the best of his ability, endeavour
that the Children be carefully instructed in the Principles of Virtue and
Religion; and that a pious, sober, and orderly, conduct be observed by
every Person in the Asylum.



DUTY OF THE ADJUTANT AND SECRETARY.


The Adjutant and Secretary is to be Resident in the House; and to
consider himself in all respects amenable to the Commandant.

It will be his Duty to summon, and attend, all meetings of the Board and
Committee; and in the notices for extraordinary meetings, either of a
General Board or Committee, he shall insert the cause of such Meetings;
He is to take down, and preserve, Minutes of all the Proceedings of the
Commissioners; and to produce them fairly written in a Book, at the next
succeeding Meeting; as also, whenever called for by a Commissioner or by
the Commandant.

He shall keep an Alphabetical List of all Applications for the Admission
of Children into the Asylum, and likewise a Register of such as are
admitted; with their Names and Ages, Time of Admission, the Regiment to
which the Father of the Child belonged; and his Parochial Settlement,
when the same can be ascertained; also, of the manner in which such Child
is disposed of, on quitting the Asylum.

He shall likewise keep a Book, wherein shall be constantly recorded the
behaviour of each of the Children.

He is also to examine, check, and keep, all the Accounts of the
Institution; and to enter the Abstract thereof in a Book, for the
examination of the Commandant, the Committee, and the Board, previously
to, or immediately after, their being ordered for Payment.

He is to keep, and deliver out, all such School Books, and Stationary, to
the Serjeant Major of Instruction, as may from time to time be wanted;
taking a Receipt for them.

He is to see that the Serjeants attend strictly to their Duty, and
maintain proper Discipline and Order among the Children; and that both
they, and the Children, do keep themselves clean and neat in their
Persons; for which purpose, it is expected that he shall frequently be in
the Schools and Workshops, and visit the Refectories, and Dormitories,
and report to the Commandant any irregularities he may observe.

He will attend to the Drill of the Boys; and to such other Military
Duties as are incident to the situation of Adjutant, or as the Commandant
may from time to time require of him.



DUTY OF THE QUARTER MASTER AND STEWARD.


The Quarter Master and Steward is to be Resident in the House.  It will
be his Duty to examine all the Provisions, Stores, and Clothing, sent in;
to see that they are of the Quality, and charged at the Price, contracted
for, under the orders of the Board; to give Check Receipts to the several
Tradesmen furnishing the same, and to take a Counter Check from them in
like manner.

He must be provided with Scales, Weights, Measures, &c. to ascertain the
Quantities of every Article brought in, which he shall regularly enter
into a Store Book, under their respective heads; to enable the Secretary
to examine the Tradesmen’s Accounts at the end of each Quarter previously
to their being paid.

He shall be accountable for all Receipts, Issues, and Remains, and keep a
regular account thereof; and shall not allow any waste to be committed by
the Servants, or suffer any article of Provisions, Clothing, or Stores,
to be carried out of the House; but shall report the same, or any other
irregularity, that may come under his notice, to the Commandant.

_He_ is to take care that every thing necessary be provided, and in
readiness for the meals of the Children, at the following Hours; viz.
Breakfast at Eight o’clock in Summer, and at Nine o’Clock in Winter;
Dinner at One o’clock the Year round; and Supper, at Seven o’Clock in
Summer, and Six o’clock in Winter.



DUTY OF THE SURGEON.


The Surgeon is to be Resident in the House.—It will be his Duty to
examine all the Children brought to the Asylum for Admission, and to
Report on any special cases occurring among them; to take charge of the
Sick; to regulate all matters within the line of his professional Duty,
respecting them and the Wards appropriated for their reception; and from
time to time to suggest to the Committee (through the Commandant)
whatever may in his Judgment appear likely to contribute to the better
health of the Children in general.



DUTY OF THE SERJEANT-MAJOR OF INSTRUCTION.


The Serjeant-Major of Instruction shall cause the Boys to rise, by beat
of Drum, at Six in the Morning from the 25th of March to the 29th of
September; and at Seven o’Clock in the Morning from the 29th September,
to the 25th of March.

He is to allow the Boys one hour to clean their Shoes, wash their Hands
and Faces, and to have their Heads combed;

He is then to read, or cause one of the Senior Boys to read, such Prayers
as may be directed by the Chaplain; after which he shall cause them to
proceed to the School-business of Reading, Writing, and the four first
Rules in Arithmetic, or to such other employments as may be assigned, to
qualify them either for the Duties of a Soldier, or for other subordinate
situations in Life.

He is previously to examine each Boy, to see that he be washed clean, and
dressed in a proper manner; and if this should have been neglected to be
done, he is to deliver the Boy, so improperly dressed, to the Serjeant or
Nurse of the Ward to which such Boy belongs, to be put in order; and he
will report any repetition of neglect in the same person to the
Commandant.

He, and his Assistants, are to attend the Boys at all meals, and to cause
one of them to say Grace, before and after each meal.

He and his Assistants are also to attend the Boys at their hours of
recreation, to prevent them from behaving improperly in any respect.

He, and his Assistants, are to see that the Boys are all in Bed at the
hours appointed; and that no Fire, or Candle, is left in their
Dormitories.

He, and his Assistants, are to see that the Boys are decently and
properly dressed on Sundays, previously to their attending Divine
Service; where they are all required to be present with the Children.

He will promote, to the utmost of his power, Good-will, Friendship, and
Cordiality, among the Children; endeavouring to impress them with those
sentiments of Virtue and Religion, which may best enable them to regulate
their future conduct.

He will be especially careful that no profane or indecent expressions be
on any occasion made use of to them, or in their hearing, by his
Assistants, or the Servants; And whenever he may discover any species of
Vice or Immorality, or tendency thereto, in the Boys, or any improper
Conduct towards them on the part of the Assistants or Servants, he is
immediately to Report the same to the Adjutant, or (through him) to the
Commandant; according to the nature and degree of the offence.

He is to make a Weekly Return of what Stationary may be wanted; in order
that it may be delivered to him by the Secretary, who will take his
Receipts for the same.

He shall, every Three Months, deliver to the Adjutant, for the purpose of
its being laid by the Commandant before the Board, an exact List of the
Boys, divided into proper Classes of Reading, Writing, and other
Employments; specifying each Boy’s Age, the time he has been in the
Asylum, the Trade to which He is applying, and the progress he has made
since his Admission.

He is to have especial care that the Assistants do their Duty diligently
in the Instruction of the Boys; and, at convenient times, he is to hear
and examine the respective Classes under their care.

He is to keep, hung up in some convenient place, the Table of the
Employment of the Boys for the several hours of the Day; and see that the
same be strictly attended to.



DUTY OF THE SERJEANT-ASSISTANTS.


The Serjeant-Assistants are to be subordinate to, and follow the
Instructions of, the Serjeant-Major; and to assist him in every
Department of his Office, to the utmost of their abilities.

They are to watch over the Boys, when at their Recreation; to prevent
them from doing mischief, or acting improperly in any respect.

They are constantly to attend Divine Service with the Children.

They are to abstain from the use of Profane or Indecent Language; and in
all respects to behave themselves Religiously and Soberly; so as, by
their example, to excite in the Children an emulation to Virtue.

They are to be present with the Boys at Meal-times; and to assist the
Serjeant-Major in keeping Silence, and maintaining a decency of
Behaviour, during Meals; and in seeing that the Candles and Fires be
extinguished in proper time in the Boys Dormitories.



DUTY OF THE DRUMMER.


The Drummer is to beat the Drum at the hours appointed for the Children’s
Meals; for their rising in the Morning, and going to Bed in the Evening;
and at any other times, or for any other purpose, that may be directed by
the Commandant.

He is to Teach such Boys to beat the Drum, as may be appointed by the
Commandant.

He is also to inflict such Corporal Punishment on the Boys, as may be
ordered by the Commandant.



DUTY OF THE MATRON.


The Matron shall be Resident in the House.  She is to have the direction
of the Female Servants, subject to the Control of the Commandant; and the
entire management of the Girls, with whom she shall be present during
their Meals.

The Rules which are above detailed for the Boys, in regard to the times
of rising and going to Bed, the hours of Instruction, the Reading of
Prayers in the Morning, and the Saying of Grace before and after each
Meal, are to be equally and uniformly maintained among the Girls, under
the immediate direction of the Matron, who shall be responsible for the
due observance of the same.

She is to superintend the Education of the Girls in Reading, Writing,
Sewing, Knitting, Marking, Washing, and getting up Linen; in Kitchen and
House-work; and in such other Female Employments as may qualify them for
useful Servants.

She is to take care, that, during their continuance under the Protection
of this Institution, they be properly employed in the School, and in the
domestic requisites of the Establishment, as far as their Ages and
Abilities will permit.

She is to take care that one of the Female Teachers, or Attendants, be
always present with the Girls at their Hours of Recreation, to prevent
them from behaving improperly in any respect.

She is to take under her charge from the Steward (giving him a Receipt
for the same) the House Linen, Children’s Linen, and Bedding.

She is to see that the Children’s and House Linen be as much as possible
made up and repaired by the Girls; that the Linen of the Children be
properly changed; and that the Beds be likewise furnished with clean
Sheets, at such times as shall be directed.

She must take care, that the Nurses be constantly attentive to the
keeping of the Children’s Heads clean and well combed, and to the washing
of their Feet thrice a Week, at the least, in Summer, and twice a Week in
Winter.

She is Personally to inspect the Dormitories of the Girls, both in the
Day-time and after they go to Bed; and she will not fail to apply to the
Commandant, whenever she may consider his interference necessary, to
enforce a due obedience to her Orders.



DUTY OF THE ASSISTANT MATRON.


The Assistant Matron shall be immediately subject to, and under the
Direction of the Matron.

She is to take care, that the Girls go to Bed, and rise in the Morning,
at the Hours appointed; that they come into School, properly washed and
combed; that they be regularly employed while in the School; and that
such as are of an Age for that purpose, be sent in rotation to be
employed in Kitchen and Laundry Work.

She is to take care, that they be occupied at stated times in making and
repairing their own Apparel, and the Linen and Stockings of the Boys; and
to see that the same be regularly changed at the times directed.



DUTY OF THE READING MISTRESS, AND OF THE KNITTING MISTRESS AND
SEMPSTRESS.


Beside the particular Objects for which the Reading Mistress, and the
Knitting Mistress and Sempstress, are respectively engaged, they shall
assist the Matron and Assistant Matron in their several Duties, as may be
required.



DUTY OF THE NURSES.


The Nurses are to see, that the Children retire orderly to their Beds at
the Hour appointed; and rise in the Morning in the same manner.

They are to take care, that the Children be properly washed and combed,
and their Clothes decently put on, before they attend in the School; and
that their Feet be regularly washed at Night, three times a Week in
Summer, and twice a Week in Winter.

They are likewise to take care, that the Dormitories, and their own
Apartments, be constantly kept clean, and in proper Order; and that the
Bedding, Sheets, Towels, and Children’s Clothing, delivered to their
care, be kept in repair, and regularly returned to the Matron, at the
times appointed.



DUTY OF THE NURSES FOR THE INFIRMARY.


It will be the Duty of each Nurse in the Infirmary to take care of all
the Children committed to her Charge; to keep them clean, and to comb
them daily.

She must never wash the Apartments where the Sick Children are kept,
without permission of the Medical Officers having the charge of them; she
shall be careful, that all Medicines, &c. delivered to her be punctually
administered at the times prescribed by such Officers; and she shall, in
every respect, implicitly obey their Directions, and those of the Matron.

She is never to be absent from the Infirmary; nor to suffer the Relations
or Friends of the Children to come there, without the Permission of the
Commandant, or Matron; and she shall in all respects conduct herself
soberly and properly, as becomes a Person intrusted with the care of the
Sick.



DUTY OF THE COOK.


The Cook is to be under the immediate Control of the Matron; and likewise
of the Steward, from whom she shall daily receive the necessary Quantity
of Provisions for the Institution.

She is to be punctual in preparing the several Meals at the hours
appointed; She shall likewise instruct such of the Girls in Kitchen-work,
as may be sent to her, in Monthly or Weekly rotation, for that purpose;
She shall keep the Kitchen and Utensils clean, and in order; She shall
not dispose of any Provisions, Kitchen-stuff, or Ashes, on any account
whatever; and she shall in all respects behave herself honestly, soberly,
and quietly in her Station.



DUTY OF THE LAUNDRESS.


The Laundress is to receive from the Matron, every Monday Morning, the
Children’s Linen, and such House Linen as is to be washed in the Week;
and to take care that the Washing be done in a proper manner, without
damaging the Linen; and she shall return the several articles back to the
Matron, at the times appointed.

She shall likewise instruct and employ such Girls in Laundry Work, as
may, from time to time, be sent for that purpose; and she must take care,
that the Laundry, and all the Utensils belonging to her Department, be
kept constantly clean, and in order.



DUTY OF THE SERJEANT PORTER.


The Serjeant Porter is constantly to reside at his Lodge; for the
cleanliness and decent Appearance of which, at all times, he shall be
responsible.

He shall not suffer any Child to go out, without a Ticket, or an Order in
Writing from the Commandant; nor any Servant, without leave from the
proper Officer.

He shall not allow the Friends or Relations of any of the Children to
pass into the Asylum, without the like permission.

                                * * * * *

The Attention of all, and every of the Officers, Assistants, and
Servants, whose particular Duties have been pointed out in the foregoing
Regulations, is required, and must constantly and invariably be given, to
the following Order, contained in His Majesty’s Warrant of this Date:

    “The Officers, Assistants, and Servants, belonging to our Royal
    Military Asylum, shall not, directly or indirectly, demand or receive
    any Perquisite; or any Emolument whatever, beyond the Pay and
    Allowances annexed to their respective Employments, as specified in
    this Our Warrant, or otherwise expressly authorized by Our
    Commissioners: and any such Officers, Assistants, or Servants,
    offending herein, shall be deemed to have forfeited their
    Situations.”

Given under Our Hands, at the Board Room of the Royal Military Asylum,
this 26th Day of April 1805.

FREDERICK, C. in C.  President.

EDWARD, General.

ERNEST, Lieut. General.

ADOLPHUS FREDERICK, Lieut. General.

HARRINGTON, General.

CHATHAM, M. G. O.

B. LONDON.

B. WINTON.

W. WINDHAM.

W. DUNDAS.

CHARLES MORGAN, Judge Advocate General.

D. DUNDAS, Governor of Chelsea Hospital.

W. DALRYMPLE.

G. HEWITT, Lieut. General.

CHARLES HENRY SOMERSET, P.M. General.

J. WHITELOCKE, Major General.

ROBERT BROWNRIGG, Major General.

HARRY CALVERT, Major General.

BROOK WATSON.

J. GAMBLE, Chaplain General.

M. LEWIS.

F. MOORE.




DIET TABLE, ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM, FOR ONE CHILD.

DAYS.          BREAKFAST.           DINNER.           SUPPER.
SUNDAY.        Milk Pottage.        Beef, roasted,    Bread, l-20th
                                    8 Ounces.         of a Quartern
               Milk, 1-6th of a                       Loaf.
               Quart.               Potatoes, 12
                                    Ounces.           Cheese, 1½
               Oatmeal, 1-20th of                     Ounce.
               a Pound.             Bread, 1-40th
                                    of a Quartern     Beer, ½ a Pint.
               Bread, 1-20th of a   Loaf.
               Quartern Loaf.
                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
MONDAY.        Ditto.               Pudding, Rice,    Bread, l-20th
                                    3 Ounces.         of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    Milk, 1-6th of
                                    a Quart.          Milk, ½ a Pint.

                                    Potatoes, 8
                                    Ounces.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
TUESDAY.       Ditto.               Beef, boiled, 8   Bread, l-20th
                                    Ounces.           of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    1 Pint of
                                    Broth.            Cheese, 1½
                                                      Ounces.
                                    Potatoes, 8
                                    Ounces.           Beer, ½ a Pint.

                                    Bread, 1-40th
                                    of a Quartern
                                    Loaf.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
WEDNESDAY.     Ditto.               Soup, Pease, 1    Bread, l-20th
                                    Gill.             of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    Potatoes, 12
                                    Ounces.           Milk, ½ a Pint.

                                    Bread, l-40th
                                    of a Quartern
                                    Loaf.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
THURSDAY.      Ditto.               Beef, stewed, 8   Bread, l-20th
                                    Ounces.           of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    Potatoes, 12
                                    Ounces.           Cheese, 1½
                                                      Ounce.
                                    Bread, l-40th
                                    of a Quartern     Beer, ½ a Pint.
                                    Loaf.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
FRIDAY.        Ditto.               Pudding, Suet,    Bread, l-20th
                                    1½ Ounce.         of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    Flour, 6
                                    Ounces.           Milk, ½ a Pint.

                                    Potatoes, 8
                                    Ounces.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.
SATURDAY.      Ditto.               Mutton, boiled,   Bread, 1-20th
                                    8 Ounces.         of a Quartern
                                                      Loaf.
                                    1 Pint of
                                    Broth.            Cheese, 1½
                                                      Ounce.
                                    Potatoes, 8
                                    Ounces.           Beer, ½ a Pint.

                                    Bread, l-40th
                                    of a Quartern
                                    Loaf.

                                    Beer, ½ a Pint.

 N. B.  The Meat is estimated as taken from the Butcher, including Bone.
       A Proportion of the very small Children on 6 Ounces of Meat.



DIET OF SERJEANTS, NURSES, &c.

DAYS.          DINNER.                          WEEKLY ALLOWANCE.
SUNDAY.        Roast Beef 1 Pound, Potatoes 1   Beer, 3 Pints.
               Pound, Bread 1 Pound.
MONDAY.        Boiled Beef 1 Pound, Ditto,      A SERJEANT,
               Ditto.
                                                1 Pound of Cheese
                                                Weekly.

                                                ½ a Pound of Butter
                                                Ditto.
TUESDAY.       Ditto, Ditto, Ditto.
WEDNESDAY.     Pease ½ a Pint, Bacon ½ a        A NURSE,
               Pound, Potatoes 1 Pound Ditto.
                                                ½ a Pound of Cheese
                                                Weekly.

                                                1 Pound of Butter
                                                Ditto.
THURSDAY.      Stewed Beef, 1 Pound, Ditto,
               Ditto.
FRIDAY.        Mutton, baked, 1 Pound, Ditto,
               Ditto.
SATURDAY.      Mutton, boiled, 1 Pound,
               Ditto, Ditto.

                                                             D. ALEXANDER,
                                                          _Quarter-Master_
                                                                  R. M. A.




CERTIFICATE AND RECOMMENDATION.


» [To be Signed by the Commanding Officer of the Regiment: unless the
Regiment be abroad, and the Child at home; in which Case, it is to be
signed by the Colonel, or (in his absence from GREAT BRITAIN or IRELAND)
by the Senior Officer of the Regiment, who may happen to be at home.]

I HEREBY certify, That . . . served in His Majesty’s . . . Regiment of
. . . Years, during which Time he conducted himself as a good Soldier; That
he . . . {69}

                                * * * * *

I further certify, according to the best of my Knowledge and Belief, that
the several Circumstances contained in the Petition on the preceding Page
of this Paper are truly stated; and that the Applicant has no Parent
capable of supporting Him; wherefore I recommend Him as an Object worthy
of the benevolent Attention of the COMMISSIONERS of the ROYAL MILITARY
ASYLUM.

» Signature of the Officer †

                                * * * * *

N.B.  The Children to be admitted into this Institution must _be free
from mental and bodily Defect or Infirmity_.  They must be the Children
of _Men actually serving in the_ REGULAR ARMY; or have been born, _before
their Fathers ceased to serve therein_; and the Fathers, if living at the
Time of Application, must either be still in the _Regular Service_, _or
Out-Pensioners_.

           The _Age_ of the FEMALES must not exceed TEN Years.

           The _Age_ of the MALES must not exceed TWELVE Years.

CHILDREN under the _Age_ of FIVE Years will not be admitted, except when
belonging to _Regiments ordered to embark for Foreign Stations_; or in
the Case of ORPHANS, or under other Circumstances of _peculiar Distress_,
which must be _specially stated_.

                                                                A MARRIAGE




FORMS OF APPLICATION, RECOMMENDATION, AND CERTIFICATES, FOR THE ADMISSION
OF
BOYS
INTO THE ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM.


_To His Royal Highness the COMMANDER IN CHIEF_, _and Others His MAJESTY’S
COMMISSIONERS for the Management of the Affairs of the Royal Military
Asylum_.

THE HUMBLE PETITION of . . .
in Behalf of . . .
the Child of . . . Soldier
in His Majesty’s . . . Regiment of . . .
SHEWETH, that the said . . . is the
lawful Child of . . . as by the
annexed Certificates will appear.
That . . . {70a}

                                * * * * *

Your Petitioner therefore humbly Prays, that the said . . . may be
admitted into the ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM; and if this Prayer be granted,
your Petitioner hereby agrees, that the said BOY shall remain in the
Asylum as long as the Commissioners thereof shall think fit; and that,
when of proper Age, he shall be disposed of at their Discretion, as an
Apprentice, or Servant; or placed, with his own free Consent, as a
Private Soldier, in the Regular Army.

                                 † {70b}

                                                               CERTIFICATE




FOOTNOTES.


{69}  Here state whether the Soldier is still in the Regiment; or dead;
or discharged: if dead, whether he died in the Service; and, if
discharged, the Date of his Discharge, and whether he was recommended to
Chelsea.

{70a}  Here state the Service and present Situation of the Father; the
Situation of the Mother (if living), and Number and Age of their other
Children (if any).

{70b}  To be signed by the Parent, or Person who has Charge of the Child.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REGULATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND GOVERNMENT OF THE ROYAL MILITARY ASYLUM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


