The Project Gutenberg eBook of His Maiesties Declaration, touching his Proceedings in the late Assemblie and Conuention of Parliament
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: His Maiesties Declaration, touching his Proceedings in the late Assemblie and Conuention of Parliament

Author: King of England James I

Release date: November 21, 2014 [eBook #47413]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Giovanni Fini and The Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS MAIESTIES DECLARATION, TOUCHING HIS PROCEEDINGS IN THE LATE ASSEMBLIE AND CONUENTION OF PARLIAMENT ***

                         TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

—Has been mantained the ancient style, therefore just the more evident
 printing errors have been corrected. Punctuation has not been corrected
 also if inconsistent with modern English.

—Italics and smallcaps have been manteined as far as possible, since as
 in old books (this one was printed in 1621) sometimes text style
 changes when a word is hyphenated.




                                 HIS
                              MAIESTIES
                             DECLARATION,

                    Touching his proceedings in the
                    _late Assemblie and Conuention_
                            of Parliament.

[Illustration: DIEV ET MON DROIT.]

                    _Imprinted at London by_ BONHAM
                         NORTON and IOHN BILL,
                 Printers to the Kings most Excellent
                            MAIESTIE. 1621.

[Illustration]




                                  HIS
                               MAIESTIES
                 Declaration, touching his proceedings
                       in the late Assembly and
                      _Conuention of Parliament_.


Hauing of late, vpon mature deliberation, with the aduice and vniforme
consent of Our whole Priuie Councell, determined to dissolue the
Assembly and Conuention of Parliament, lately called together by Our
Regall power and Authoritie, Wee were pleased by Our Proclamation,
giuen at Our Palace of _Westminster_ the sixt day of this instant
_Ianuary_, to declare, not onely Our pleasure and resolution therein,
but also to expresse some especiall passages and proceedings, moouing
vs to that resolution: Wherein, albeit hauing so many yeeres swayed
the swords and scepters of three renowned kingdomes, Wee cannot but
discerne (as much as any Prince liuing) what apperteineth to the height
of a powerfull Monarch: yet, that all men might discerne, that Wee,
like Gods true Viceregent, delight not so much in the greatnesse of
Our place, as in the goodnesse & benignitie of our gouernment, We were
content in that one Act to descend many degrees beneath Our Selfe:
First, by communicating to all Our people the reasons of a resolution
of State, which Princes vse to reserue, _inter arcana Imperij_, to
themselues and their Priuie Councell: Secondly, by mollifying and
mixing the peremptorie and binding qualitie of a Proclamation, with
the indulgence of a milde and fatherly instruction: And lastly,
leading them, and opening to them that forbidden Arke of Our absolute
and indisputable Prerogatiue, concerning the calling, continuing,
and dissoluing of Parliaments: which, though it were more then
superabundant to make Our Subiects know the realitie of Our sincere
intentions; yet Wee not satisfied therewith, but finding the bounds of
a Proclamation too straight to conteine and expresse the boundlesse
affection that Wee beare to Our good and louing people, are pleased
hereby to inlarge Our Selfe, (as Wee promised in Our said Proclamation)
by a more full and plaine expression of those Letters and Messages that
passed from Vs to the Commons in Parliament, which by reason of the
length of them, could not bee related at large, but briefly pointed
at in Our said Proclamation. For, as in generall the great actions of
Kings are done as vpon a stage, obuious to the publike gazing of euery
man; so are Wee most willing, that the trueth of this particular,
concerning Our owne honour, and the satisfaction of Our Subjects,
should bee represented vnto all men without vaile or couering, being
assured that the most plainnesse and freedome will most aduantage Vs,
hauing in this, and all Our Actions euer affected such sinceritie and
vprightnes of heart, as were Wee all transparent, and that men might
readily passe to Our inward thoughts, they should there perceiue the
selfe–same affections which Wee haue euer professed in Our outward
words and Actions.

Hauing anticipated the time of reassembling Our Parliament to the
twentieth day of _Nouember_ last, (which Wee formerly appointed to
haue met vpon the eighth of _February_ next,) vpon the confidence
that their noble and generous declaration at their parting the fourth
of _Iune_ put vs in, of their free and liberall assistance to the
recouery of Our Childrens ancient inheritance, and hauing declared to
them Our resolution of taking vpon Vs the defence of Our childrens
patrimonie by way of Armes, the Commons very heartily and dutifully
fell immediatly after their reassembling, to treat of a necessary
supplie, and concluded, for the present, to grant a Subsidie to be paid
in _February_ next, (the last paiment of the latter Subsidie granted
by them being not to come in vntill _May_ following) whereby Wee were
well and cleerly satisfied of the good intenti[=o] of the Commons in
generall, by whose vniforme vote & assent that Subsidy was resolued
on, not without intimation of a more ample supplie to be yeelded in
conuenient time.

But before this their resolution was reduced into a formall Acte or
Bill, some discontented persons that were the cause of all that euill
which succeeded, endeauouring to clog the good will of the Commons with
their owne vnreasonable ends, fell to dispute in the House of Our high
Prerogatiues, namely of the match of Our dearest sonne the Prince, of
the making warre with forreigne Princes Our Allies, betweene whom and
Vs there was a firme peace religiously made and obserued hitherunto:
All which they couered with the cloake of Religion, and with the
faire pretence of a duetifull Petition to bee preferred to Vs. Wee
vnderstanding right well, that those points were not disputable in
Parliament, without Our owne Royall direction, being of Our highest
Prerogatiues, the very Characters of Souereignty; & thinking, that
when euery Subiect by nature, and the Lawes of the Realme, had the
power of matching their children according to their owne best liking,
none should denie Vs the like; especially Wee hauing at the beginning
of the Parliament declared Our purpose concerning the matching of Our
Sonne, the Prince, were fully perswaded, that those specious outsides
of Religion and humble petitioning, were added onely to gaine passage
vnto those things, which being propounded in their true colours, must
needs haue appeared vniust and vnreasonable, as matters wherewith
neuer any Parliament had presumed to meddle before, except they had
bene thereunto required by their King; nay, not befitting Our Priuie
Councell to meddle with, without Our speciall command and allowance;
since the very consulting vpon such matters (though in neuer so priuate
a maner) being discouered abroad, might at some time produce as ill
effects, as if they were publikely resolued vpon. For as concerning the
point of Religion, We aswell in the beginning of the Parliament, by a
publike and open Declaration made to both Houses in the higher House of
Parliament, as also shortly after, by a gracious answere vnto a former
Petition of theirs, expressed to the full Our immutable resolution to
maintaine true Religion, besides the vntainted practise of Our whole
life in that point. And howsoeuer an humble Petition beare a faire shew
of respect; yet if vnder colour of concluding on a Petition, a way
should bee opened to treat in Parliament of the mysteries of State,
without Our Royall allowance, it were a great and vnusuall breach vpon
the Royall power: Besides, who knoweth not that the preferring of a
Petition, includes an expectation to haue it graunted? and therefore to
nippe this springing euill in the beginning, Wee directed Our Letters
to the Speaker of that House, the tenour of which Letters followeth.

Master Speaker, _Wee haue heard by diuers reports to Our great griefe,
That the farre distance of Our Person at this time from Our high
Court of Parliament, caused by Our want of health, hath emboldened
some fiery and popular spirits in Our House of Commons, to debate and
argue publikely, in matters farre beyond their reach or capacitie,
and so tending to Our high dishonour, and to the trenching vpon Our
Prerogatiue Royall. You shall therefore acquaint that House with Our
Pleasure, That none therein shall henceforth presume to meddle with any
thing concerning Our gouernment, or mysteries of State; namely, not
to speake of Our dearest Sonnes match with the Daughter of_ Spaine,
_nor to touch the Honour of that King, or any other Our friends or
Confederates: And also not to meddle with any mens particulars, which
haue their due motion in Our ordinarie Courts of Justice. And whereas
We heare that they haue sent a message to_ S^[ir] Edwin Sandys, _to
know the reasons of his late restraint, you shall in Our name resolue
them, That it was not for any misdemeanour of his in Parliament: But
to put them out of doubt of any question of that nature that may arise
among them hereafter, you shall resolue them in Our name, That We
thinke our Selfe very free and able to punish any mans misdemeanours
in Parliament, as well during their sitting, as after; which We
meane not to spare hereafter, vpon any occasion of any mans insolent
behauiour there, that shall be ministred vnto Us. And if they haue
already touched any of these points which Wee haue here forbidden, in
any Petition of theirs which is to be sent vnto Vs, it is Our pleasure
that you shall tell them, That except they reforme it before it come
to Our hands, Wee will not deigne the hearing nor answering of it. And
whereas Wee heare that they are desirous, that We should make this a
Seßion of Parliament before Christmas, You may tell them, It shall be
in their default if they want it: For if they will make ready betweene
this and that time, some such Lawes as shall be really good for the
Common–wealth, Wee will very willingly giue Our Royall assent vnto
them: And so it shall thereby appeare, That if good Lawes be not made
at this time for the weale of the people, the blame shall onely and
most iustly lie vpon such turbulent spirits, as shall preferre their
particular ends to the weale of this Kingdome and Common–wealth. And so
We bid you farewell. Giuen at Our Court at Newmarket, the third day of
December, 1621._

  To Our trustie and welbeloued,
  _The Speaker of Our Commons_
  House of Parliament.

Which Letters being publikely read in the House, they were so farre
either from reforming their intended Petition, which conteined those
points by Vs forbidden, or yet from going on cheerefully in propounding
of good Lawes, for which they were called, and to which purpose Wee
granted them in the end of Our said Letter to the Speaker, to make it
a Session before Christmas, whereof Wee vnderstood them to bee very
desirous, that they resolued to send the same vnto vs together with
another Petition iustifying the former, notwithstanding Our forbidding
them in Our said Letter to send the former Petition vnto Vs, as also
sate euer silent thereafter, till they were dissolued, as shall
hereafter more largely be expressed.

Those petitions being sent from the Commons by a select number of that
House vnto Vs then being at _Newmarket_ for Our health, the House
forbare to proceed in any businesse of importance, purposing, as
was apparently discerned, and as the euent prooued, so to continue
vntill the returne of their Messengers with Our Answere, which wee
vnderstanding, and being desirous to haue the time better husbanded, as
was fit (the shortnesse thereof, by reason of the approach of Christmas
being respected) required Our Secretarie to deliuer a Message vnto them
for this purpose, which he did, first by word of mouth, and after by
appointment of the House set it downe in writing in these words, viz.

_His Majestie, remembring that this House was desirous to haue a Seßion
betweene this and Christmasse, whereupon it pleased Him to signifie
vnto vs, that wee should haue contentment therein, and that there
should be a Seßion, if wee our selues were not in fault, taking now
notice that the House forbeares to proceede with any Billes vntill
the returne of the Messengers, lately sent vnto his Majestie, hath
enioyned mee to commaund the House in his Name not to lose time in
their proceeding for preparing of good Lawes in the meane while, in
consideration of this so neere approach of Christmaße; And that his
Majestie hopes they will not take vpon them to make a Recesse in
effect, though not in shew without his warrant._

Bvt this Message being deliuered, was so farre from working that good
effect, which Wee did most iustly expect, that contrariwise some
captious and curious heads tooke exception thereat, as tending to the
breach of their Priuiledges, by commanding them to proceede with Bills,
though We thereby, neither designed any particular Billes for them to
proceed with, nor yet forbade any other Parliamentary proceedings; And
with those, and such other vndutifull straines of wit, they spunne out
the time vntill the returne of their Messengers, who being come to
_Newmarket_, presented both the Petitions vnto vs, who well knowing
before hand the effect of the former, and then obseruing the contents
of the latter, and finding, that from both did reflect vpon Our Person
and gouernment sundry causelesse aspersions, and that thereby Our
Royall Prerogatiues were inuaded and assailed, after an admonition to
beware of medling therewith, Wee returned vnto them Our Answere in
writing, as followeth.

  HIS MAJESTIES ANSWERE
  to the Apologetike
  Petition of the House of
  COMMONS,
  _Presented to his Majesty by a dozen_
  of the Members of that House,
  _by their directions_.

_We must heere begin in the same fashion that We would haue done if
your first Petition had come to Our hands before We had made stay
thereof, which is to repeat the first words of the late_ Queene _of
famous memory, vsed by her in Answer to an insolent proposition, made
by a_ Polonian _Ambassadour vnto her, That is_, Legatum expectabamus,
Heraldum accepimus. _For We had great reason to expect that the first
Meßage from your House should haue beene a Message of thankesgiuing
for Our continued gracious behauior towards Our people since your
last Recesse, not onely by Our Proclamation of grace, wherein were
conteined sixe or seuen and thirty Articles, all of seuerall points
of grace to the people; but also by the labour We tooke for the
satisfaction of both Houses in those three Articles recommended vnto
Vs in both their names by the right Reuerend Father in God, the
Archbishop of_ Canterbury, _And likewise for the good gouernement of_
Ireland _We are now in hand with at your request. But not onely haue
Wee heard no newes of all this, but contrary great complaints of the
danger of Religion within this Kingdome tacitely implying Our ill
gouernment in this point. And We leaue to you to iudge, whether it
be your duties that are the Representatiue body of Our people, so to
distast them with Our gouernment, whereas by the contrary it is your
duty with all your endeauours to kindle more and more a dutifull and
thankefull loue in the peoples hearts towards Vs for Our iust and
gracious gouernment. Now, whereas in the very beginning of this your
Apologie, you taxe Vs in faire termes of trusting vncertaine reports,
and partiall informations concerning your proceedings, We wish you to
remember, that We are an old and experienced King, needing no such
leßons, being in Our conscience freest of any King aliue from hearing
or trusting idle reports, which so many of your House as are neerest Vs
can beare witnesse vnto you, if you would giue as good eare to them,
as you doe to some Tribunitiall Orators amongst you. And for proofe
in this particular, Wee haue made your owne Meßengers conferre your
other Petition, sent by you with the copie thereof, which was sent Vs
before, betweene which there is no difference at all, but that since
Our receiuing the first Copy you added a conclusion vnto it, which
could not come to Our hands till it was done by you, and your Meßengers
sent, which was all at one time. And if that We had had no Copie of
it before hand, We must haue receiued your first Petition to Our
great dishonour, before Wee had knowen what it conteined, which would
haue enforced Vs to haue returned you a farre worse answer then now
We doe. For then your Meßengers had returned with nothing; but that
Wee haue iudged your petition vnlawfull and vnworthy of an Answere.
For as to your Conclusion thereof, it is nothing, but_ Protestatio
contraria facto. _For in the body of your petition you vsurpe vpon Our
Prerogatiue Royall, and meddle with things farre aboue your reach:
And then in the conclusion you protest the contrary, as if a Robber
would take a mans purse, and then protest he meant not to rob him.
For first, you presume to giue Vs your aduice concerning the match
of Our dearest Son with some Protestant, We cannot say Princeße (for
Wee know none of these fit for him,) and disswade Vs from his match
with_ Spaine, _vrging Vs to a present warre with that King: And yet
in the conclusion, forsooth, ye protest ye intend not to preße vpon
Our most vndoubted and regall Prerogatiue as if the Petitioning of
Vs in matters that your selues confeße yee ought not to meddle with,
were not a medling with them. And whereas yee pretend, that you were
inuited to this course by the speeches of three Honourable Lords;
Yet by so much as your selues repeat of their speeches, nothing can
bee concluded, but that Wee were resolued by warre to regaine the_
Palatinate, _if otherwise VVee could not attaine vnto it; and you were
inuited to aduise forthwith vpon a supplie for keeping the forces in
the_ Palatinate _from disbanding, and to foresee the meanes for the
raysing and maintaining of the body of an Armie for that warre against
the Spring. Now what inference can be made vpon this, That therefore
VVe must presently denounce warre against the King of_ Spaine, _breake
Our dearest Sonnes match, and match him to one of Our Religion, let
the world iudge. The difference is no greater, then as if We would
tell a Merchant, that Wee had great neede to borrow money from him
for raysing an Armie, that thereupon it should follow, that VVe were
bound to follow his aduice in the directions of the warre, and all
things depending thereupon. But yet not contenting your selues with
this excuse of yours, which indeed cannot hold water, ye come after
to a direct contradiction to the conclusion of your former Petition,
saying, That the Honour and safety of Vs and Our Posterity, and the_
Patrimony _of Our Children, inuaded and poßessed by their enemies,
the welfare of Religion, and State of Our Kingdome are matter at any
time not vnfit for your deepest considerations in Parliament. To this
generality We answere with the_ Logicians, _That where all things
are contained, nothing is omitted. So as this plenipotencie of yours
inuests you in all power vpon Earth, lacking nothing but the Popes
to haue the keyes also both of Heauen and Purgatory. And to this
vast generality of yours, VVe can giue no other answer, for it will
trouble all the best Lawyers in the House to make a good Commentary
vpon it: For so did the Puritan Ministers in Scotland bring all kinde
of causes within the compasse of their iurisdiction, saying, That
it was the Churches office to iudge of slander, and there could no
kinde of crime or fault bee committed, but there was a slander in it,
either against God, the King, or their Neighbour. And by this meanes
they hooked in to themselues the cognisance of all causes, or like_
Bellarmines _distinction of the Popes power ouer all Kings_, in ordine
ad Spiritualia, _whereby he giues him all temporall iurisdiction ouer
them. But to giue you a direct Answer to the matter of warre, for which
you are so earnest, VVe confeße VVee rather expected that you should
haue giuen Vs great and hartie thanks for the so long maintaining a
setled peace in all Our Dominions, when as all Our Neighbours about
are in a miserable combustion of warre; but_ Dulce bellum inexpertis;
_and We indeed find by experience, that a number of Our Subiects are so
pampered with peace, as they are desirous of change, though they know
not what. It is true that We haue euer professed, and in that minde,
with Gods grace, Wee meane to liue and die, That We will labour by all
meanes poßible, either by treaty, or by force to restore Our Children
to their ancient Dignities and Inheritances; and whatsoeuer Christian
Princes or Potentates will set themselues against it, Wee will not
spare any lawfull meanes to bring Our so iust and Honourable purpose to
a good end; neither shall the Match of Our Sonne, or any other worldly
respect be preferred to this Our Resolution: For by Our credit, and
interuention with the King of Spaine, and the Arch–dutcheße, and her
Husband now with God, Wee preserued the lower_ Palatinat _one whole
yeere from any further conquering in it, which within any eight dayes
space in that time might haue easily been swallowed vp by_ Spinolaes
_Armie, without any resistance; and in no better case was it now, at
Our Ambassadour, the Lord_ Digbies _comming through_ Heydleberg, _if
he had not extraordinarily succoured it. But because Wee perceiue that
ye couple this warre of the_ Palatinate _with the cause of Religion,
We must a little vnfold your eyes herein. The beginning of this
miserable warre, which hath set all Christendome on fire, was not for
Religion; but onely caused by Our Sonne in law his hastie and rash
Resolution, following euill counsell, to take to himselfe the Crowne
of_ Bohemia: _And that this is true, himselfe wrote Letters vnto Vs
at that time, desiring Vs to giue aßurance, both to the French King,
and State of_ Venice, _that his accepting of the Crowne of_ Bohemia
_had no reference to the cause of Religion, but onely by reason of
his right by Election (as hee called it:) And we would be sorrie that
that aspersion should come vpon Our Religion, as to make it a good
pretext for dethroning of Kings, and vsurping their Crownes. And Wee
would bee loath that Our people here should be taught that doctrine:
No, let vs not so farre wrong the Iesuits, as to rob them of their
sweet Positions and practise in that point. And vpon the other part, We
aßure Our selfe so farre of your charitable thoughts of Vs, that Wee
would neuer haue constantly denyed Our Sonne in law, both the title and
aßistance in that point, if Wee had beene well perswaded of the iustice
of his quarrell. But to conclude this point, This vniust vsurpation
of the Crownes of_ Bohemia _and_ Hungaria _from the Emperour, hath
giuen the Pope, and all that partie, too faire a ground, and opened
them too wide a gate for the curbing and oppreßing of many thousands
of Our Religion, in diuers parts of Christendome. And whereas yee
excuse your touching vpon the King of_ Spaine _vpon the occasion of
the incidents by you repeated in that place, and yet affirme that it
is without any touch to his honor, We cannot wonder ynough, that ye
are so forgetfull, both of your words and writs. For in your former
Petition ye plainely affirme, that hee affects the Temporall Monarchie
of the whole earth, then which there can be no more malice vttered
against any great King, to make all other Princes and Potentates,
both enuie and hate him. But, if ye list, it may be easily tryed,
whether that speech touched him in honour or not, if We shall aske
him the question, whether hee meanes to aßume to himselfe that title
or no; For euery King can best iudge of his owne honour. Wee omit the
particular eiaculations of some foule mouthed Orators in your House,
against the honour of his Crowne and State. And touching your excuse of
not determining any thing concerning the Match of Our dearest Sonne,
but onely to tell your opinions, and lay it downe at Our feet; First,
We desire to know how you could haue presumed to determine in that
point, without committing of high Treason. And next, you cannot deny,
but your talking of his Match after that manner was a direct breach
of Our commandement & Declaration out of Our own mouth, at the first
sitting downe of this Parliament; where We plainely professed, that
We were in treatie of his Match with_ Spaine, _and wished you to haue
that confidence in Our Religion and Wisedome, that We would so manage
it, as our Religion should receiue no preiudice by it. And the same We
now repeat vnto you, professing, that We are so farre ingaged in that
Match, as We cannot in honour goe backe, except the King of_ Spaine
_performe not such things as We expect at his hands. And therefore We
are sorrie, that ye should shew to haue so great distrust in Vs, or to
conceiue that We should be cold in our Religion: Otherwise We cannot
imagine how Our former publike Declaration should not haue stopped
your mouthes in this point. And as to your request, that We would now
receiue your former Petition, We wonder what could make you presume
that Wee would now receiue it; whereas in Our former Letter We plainely
declared the contrarie vnto you; and therefore Wee haue iustly reiected
that suit of yours: For what haue you left vnattempted in the highest
points of Soueraigntie in that Petition of yours, except the striking
of Coine; For it containes the violation of Leagues, the particular
way how to gouerne a warre, and the Marriage of Our dearest Sonne,
both negatiue with_ Spaine, _nay with any other Popish Princesse; and
also affirmatiue, as to the matching with one of Our Religion, which
Wee confesse is a straine beyond any prouidence or wisedome God hath
giuen Vs, as things now stand. These are vnfit things to be handled
in Parliament, except your King should require it of you; For who can
haue wisedome to iudge of things of that nature, but such as are daily
acquainted with the particulars of Treaties, and of the variable or
fixed connexion of affaires of State, together with the knowledge of
the secret wayes, ends, and intentions of Princes in their seuerall
negotiations; otherwise a small mistaking in matters of this nature,
may produce more effects then can be imagined: And therefore_, Ne sutor
vltra crepidam. _And besides, the intermedling in Parliament with
matters of Peace or Warre, and Marriage of Our dearest Sonne, would
be such a diminution to Vs and to Our Crowne in forreine Countreys,
as would make any Prince neglect to treat with Vs, either in matters
of Peace or Marriage, except they might be assured by the assent of
Parliament. And so it prooued long agoe with a King of_ France, _who
vpon a tricke procuring his States to dissent from some treaty, which
before he had made, was after refused treating with by other Princes,
to his great reproach, vnlesse hee Would first procure the assent of
the three Estates to their proposition. And will you cast your eyes
vpon the late times, you shall finde, that the late Queene of famous
memorie was humbly petitioned by a Parliament to be pleased to Marrie;
But her answere was, That shee liked their Petition well, because it
was simple, not limiting her to place or person, as not befitting her
liking to their fancies; and if they had done otherwise, shee would
haue thought it a high presumption in them. Iudge then what Wee may doe
in such a case, hauing made Our publique Declaration alreadie, as VVee
said before, directly contrary to that which you haue now petitioned.
Now to those points in your Petition, whereof you desire an answere,
as properly belonging to a Parliament; The first and greatest point is
that of Religion, concerning which at this time Wee can giue you no
other answere then in the generall, which is, That you may rest secure,
that Wee will neuer be wearie to doe all Wee can for the propagation
of Our Religion, and repreßing of Poperie; but the maner and forme you
must remit to Our care and prouidence, who can best consider of times
and seasons, not by vndertakng a publique warre of Religion through
all the world at once, which how hard and dangerous a taske it would
prooue, you may iudge. But this puts vs in mind, how all the world
complained the last yeere of plentie of Corne, and God hath sent vs a
cooling card this yeere for that heat; And so We pray God, that this
desire amongst you of kindling warres, shewing your wearinesse of Peace
and Plentie, may not make God permit vs to fall in the miseries of
both. But as Wee alreadie said, Our care of Religion must be such, as
on the one part We must not by the hote prosecution of Our Recusants
at home irritate forreine Princes of contrary Religion, and teach them
the way to plague the Protestants in their Dominions, whom with Wee
daily intercede, and at this time principally, for ease to them of
Our profeßion that liue vnder them; yet vpon the other part, We neuer
meane to spare from due and seuere punishment any Papist that will grow
insolent for liuing vnder Our so milde Gouernment. And you may also be
assured, We will leaue no care vntaken, as well for the good education
of the youth at home, especially the children of Papists, as also for
preseruing at all times hereafter the youth that are, or shall be
abroad, from being bred in dangerous places, and so poisoned in Popish
Seminaries. And as in this point, namely concerning the good education
of the Popish youth at home, We haue alreadie giuen some good proofe,
both in this Kingdome and in_ Ireland: _So will We be well pleased to
passe any good Lawes that shall be made, either now, or at any time
hereafter to this purpose. And as to your request, of making this a
Seßion, and granting a generall Pardon, it shall be in your defaults if
Wee make not this a Seßion before Christmas, as in Our former Letter
We notified vnto you. But for the Pardon, yee craue such particulars
in it as Wee must be well aduised vpon, lest otherwise Wee giue you
backe the double or triple of that Wee are to receiue by your entire
Subsidie without Fifteens. But the ordinarie course Wee hold fittest
to bee vsed still in this case, which is, that Wee should of Our free
grace send you downe a Pardon from the Higher House, containing such
points as We shall thinke fittest, wherein We hope ye shall receiue
good satisfaction. But We cannot omit to shew you how strange We thinke
it, that ye should make so bad and vniust a Commentarie vpon some
words of Our former Letter, as if We meant to restraine you thereby
of your ancient priuiledges and liberties in Parliament. Truly a
scholler would bee ashamed so to misplace and misiudge any sentences
in another mans booke. For whereas in the fore–end of Our former
Letter We discharge you to meddle with matters of gouernment, or
mysteries of State, namely matters of Warre or Peace, or Our dearest
Sonnes Match with_ Spaine; _by which particular denominations We
interpret and restraine Our former words; and then towards the end
of Our Letter We forbid you to meddle with such things as haue their
ordinarie course in Courts of Justice: Yee couple together those two
sentences, lying farre asunder, and plainly leaue out these words, of
mysteries of State; So as ye erre_ à bene diuisis ad male coniuncta.
_For of the former part, concerning mysteries of State, Wee plainelie
restrained Our meaning to the particulars that were after mentioned:
and in the latter We confeße We meant it by_ S^[ir] Edward Cokes
_foolish busineße, because these heades he is accused of were before
your meeting presented vnto Vs, and We had setled a legall course of
proceeding therein. And therefore it had well become him, especiallie
being Our Seruant, and one of Our Councell, if hee had had any thing
against it, to haue complained vnto Vs, which he neuer did, though he
was ordinarilie at Our Court, since that time, and neuer had acceße
refused vnto him. And although We cannot allow of the stile, calling it
your ancient and vndoubted right and inheritance, but could rather haue
wished, that ye had said that your priuiledges were deriued from the
grace and permißion of Our Ancestours and Vs; For most of them grow
from precedents, which shewes rather a toleration then inheritance.
Yet Wee are pleased to giue you Our Royall assurance, That as long as
you shall continue to containe your selues within the limits of your
dutie and respect to Vs (as Wee aßure Our selfe you will doe) Wee
will bee as carefull to maintaine and preserue your lawfull liberties
and priuiledges as euer any Our Predeceßours were, nay as to preserue
Our owne Royall Prerogatiue. So as your House shall onelie haue neede
to beware to trench vpon the Prerogatiue of the Crowne, which would
enforce Vs, or any iust King to retrench them of their priuiledges,
that would pare his Prerogatiue and flowers of the Crowne. But of
this We hope there shall neuer be cause giuen. And to conclude, since
Wee haue now so largely expressed the sinceritie of Our meaning vnto
you, We require you to goe on cheerefullie, and to vse all conuenient
diligence for preparing such good Lawes for Vs to paße at this time, as
the people may see the care, that both Wee and you haue for the good
gouernement of the Kingdome; ending as We did in Our former Letter;
If there be not a happie Seßion made at this time, it shall bee in
your default. And aboue all, beware by your waywardneße at this time,
to giue Our Childrens Aduersaries cause to insult vpon them, vpon the
rumour that shall be spred abroad of a distraction betweene Vs and
Our people, wherof ye are the representatiue bodie._ At Our Court at
Newmarket the 11. day of December, 1621.




This Answere being giuen at _Newmarket_, on Tuesday, the eighth of
_December_, and returned to the house on Friday, the fourteenth of
_December_, some carping wits that were more inclinable to peruert and
wrest Our words vnto a sence contrary to our meaning, then to doe any
good office betweene Vs and Our people, began to take exception at some
words concerning their priuiledges toward the end of Our sayd Answere,
that thereby their Priuiledges were denied and infringed; And by their
example others of more moderate and better temper were drawen into some
doubts and iealousies, which occasioned much discontentment in the
House, which comming to Our eares, and being willing to omit nothing
on Our part, that might aßure the Commons that Wee meant nothing lesse
then to violate their Priuiledges, for explanation of Our true intent
in the former, We wrote Our Letters directed to Our Secretary, which
followe in these words.




_Right trusty and Welbeloued Councellour, Wee greet you well. Wee
are sorrie to heare, that, notwithstanding Our reiterated Meßages to
Our House of Commons, for going on in their businesses in regard of
the shortneße of time, betwixt this and Christmas, and of their owne
earnest desire, that Wee should now conclude a Seßion, by making of
good and profitable Lawes, they continue to loose time; And now of
late, vpon Our gracious Answer sent vnto them, haue taken occasion to
make more delay, in appointing a Committee to morrow, to consider vpon
the points of Our Answer; and especially concerning that point in it
which maketh mention of their priuiledges. Our pleasure therefore is,
that you shall in Our name tell them, that We are so loath to haue time
mis–spent, which is so pretious a thing, in the well vsing whereof Our
people may receiue so great a benefit, as We are thus farre contented
to discend from Our Royall dignity, by explaining at this time Our
meaning in Our sayd Answer, touching that point, That all Our good
Subiects in that House, that intend nothing but Our Honour, and the
weale of the Common–wealth, may cleerely see Our intention. Whereas in
Our sayd Answere We told them, that Wee could not allow of the stile,
calling it their ancient and vndoubted right and inheritance; but
could rather haue wished, that they had sayd their priuiledges were
deriued from the grace and permißion of Our Ancestors and Vs: (for
most of them grow from presidents, which shewes rather a toleration
then inheritance) the plaine truth is, That Wee cannot with patience
endure Our Subiects to vse such Antimonarchicall words to Vs concerning
their Liberties, except they had subioyned, that they were granted
vnto them by the grace and fauour of Our Predecessours. But as for Our
intention herein, God knowes Wee neuer meant to deny them any lawfull
Priuiledges that euer that House enioyed in Our Predecessours times,
as We expected Our said Answere should haue sufficiently cleered them;
neither in Justice what euer they haue vndoubted right vnto; nor in
Grace what euer Our Predeceßours or We haue graciously permitted vnto
them: And therefore We made that distinction of_ the most part; _For
whatsoeuer Priuiledges or Liberties they enioy by any Law or Statute,
shall be euer inuiolably preserued by Vs; And Wee hope Our Posteritie
will imitate Our footsteps therein. And whatsoeuer Priuiledges they
enioy by long Custome, and vncontrolled and lawfull Presidents, Wee
will likewise be as carefull to preserue them, and transmit the care
thereof to Our Posteritie; neither was it any way in Our minde to
thinke of any particular point wherein Wee meant to disallow of their
Liberties. So as in Iustice We confesse Our selues to be bound to
maintaine them in their rights; and in Grace We are rather minded to
encrease, then infringe any of them, if they shall so deserue at Our
hands. To end therefore as Wee began, let them goe on cheerefully in
their businesses, reiecting the curious wrangling of Lawyers vpon words
and syllables; otherwise (which God forbid) the world shall see how
often and how earnestly Wee haue pressed them to goe on, according to
their calling, with those things that are fit to be done for the weale
of Our Crowne and Kingdome; And how many curious shifts haue beene
from time to time maliciously found out, to frustrate Vs of Our good
purpose, and hinder them from the performance of that Seruice, which
they ought to Vs and to Our whole Kingdome; whereof when the Countrey
shall come to be truely enformed, they will giue the Authours thereof
little thankes._

 Giuen at Our Court at Royston, the sixteenth day of December, 1621.


 To Our right trustie and welbeloued Councellor, Sir _George Caluert_,
 Knight, one of Our principall Secretaries.




And finding, that notwithstanding all this care taken by Vs for
their satisfaction, & that Our thrice reiterated pressing them to
husband well the shortnesse of time, in doing good businesse fit for
a Parliament, Wee were so farre from preuailing with them, as to
all those three admonitions of Ours, which are here related, First,
by Our message deliuered by Our Secretary; Next, by Our conclusion
of Our Answere to their Petition; And lastly, by the conclusion of
Our explanation sent to Our Secretarie, We neither got answere, nor
obedience; Yet the continuall care Wee had that this meeting should not
dissolue without some fruit for the publike good of Our Subiects, made
Vs addresse another Letter to the Speaker in these words.




Master Speaker, _Whereas at the humble suit of Our house of Commons
Wee condescended to make this meeting a Seßion before Christmas, to
which purpose We gaue them time vntill Saturday next, in case they
would seriously applie themselues to that end; & likewise since, out
of Our Grace, and to take away al mistakings, by Our Letters directed
to Our Secretarie, Wee were pleased so fully and clearely to explane
Our selues in the point of maintaining all lawfull Priuiledges to
Our said House, which since Wee cannot heare hath had the wished
effect, in making them spend this short time in preparing things most
necessary for a Seßion, Wee haue thought good once more clearely by
this to impart Our minde vnto them; which is, that in respect of the
expectation after this so long a meeting in Parliament, as also that
the generalitie, for the most part, rather iudge things by the outward
effects then enter into the causes of them, Wee haue an earnest desire
to make this a Seßion, to the end that our good and louing Subjects
may haue some taste, aswell of Our Grace and goodnesse towards them by
our free Pardon, and good Lawes to be passed, as they haue had, both
by the great, and vnusuall examples of Iustice since this meeting, and
the so many eases and comforts giuen vnto them by Proclamatiō: And
therfore calling to minde, that the paßing of the Subsidie, an Acte for
continuance of Statutes, and the Pardon, are the three most preßing
businesses to be effected before the end of the Seßion, Wee wish
them, that, as Wee haue giuen order for the Pardon to goe on with all
expedition, so they presently goe in hand with the Acte for continuance
of Statutes. As for the Subsidie, though time presseth much, yet if
they finde it may not now conueniently be done, we will not make that
any way an impediment to the good which Wee desire our people should
feele by making this a Seßion. Thus much We thought good to giue them
to vnderstand, and withall to assure them, that if they shall not
applie themselues instantly to prepare the aforesaid things for Our
Royall Assent against Saturday next, Wee will without expecting any
further answere from them, construe by their slackenesse, that they
desire not a Session; and in such case We must giue a larger time for
their returning homeward, to such of both Houses as are to goe into
their Countreys to keepe hospitalitie among their neighbours in this
time of Recesse._

 Giuen at our Court at _Theobalds_, the 17. day of _December_, 1621.


 To Our trustie and welbeloued, Sir _Thomas Richardson_, Knight, Speaker
 of Our Commons House of Parliament.




And hauing at last (as Wee hoped) by these meanes scattered and
dispersed those mistes and vapours, which had beene thus raised about
their Priuiledges, the House hauing resolued on Tuesday, the eighteenth
of _December_, to returne thankes vnto Vs, and therewith an excuse for
not making a Sessi[=o], and passing Bills, both conteined in a Petition
in writing, and dispatched the same vnto Vs, being by that time come to
_Theobalds_, the tenour whereof followeth.


 May it please your most Excellent MAIESTIE,

_We your most loyall and humble Subiects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgeßes of your Commons House of Parliament, hauing this Morning, to
our great comfort, heard your Maiesties Letter sent to our Speaker,
full of Grace and Goodneße to vs and all your people, haue thought it
our duetie foorthwith, to returne our most humble and heartie thankes
to your Sacred Maiestie, for so Royall a fauour vouchsafed vnto vs; And
we doe humbly beseech your Maiestie to be truely informed from vs, that
although we haue beene very desirous in our duetie to your Maiestie,
who called vs to this seruice, and to our Countrey for whom we serue,
to haue some good Lawes now to haue beene paßed; and that there might
haue beene a Seßion before Christmaße, to which your Maiestie vpon our
humble Petition, was heretofore Graciously pleased to giue way: yet
entring now into a serious consideration of the nature of those things,
which must of neceßitie be prepared for the finishing of a Seßion, and
the strait of time whereunto we are driuen, by some vnhappy diuersions
which haue fallen vpon vs, to our great griefe, wee are enforced once
againe to fly to your Maiesties Grace and fauour, humbly submitting
our selues to your Royall wisedome, what time will be fittest for our
departure, and for our reacceße, to perfect those beginnings which are
in preparation with vs; which time by Gods grace we resolue to spend
with that diligence and care, as shall giue good satisfaction to your
Maiestie, to our Countrey, and to our owne consciences, that we shall
make good vse thereof._




This Wee accepted graciously, and returned them an answere by their
owne Messengers in these words.


_That We were sorrie this could not bee made a Seßion, according to
their owne desire expressed in their late Petition preferred vnto Vs,
to which Wee had most willingly aßented; that they knew there was
no fault in Vs, who obseruing the needleße impediments, vpon which
they tooke occasion to stay their proceedings, had often admonished
them, not to lose time; first, by Secretary_ Caluert, _and afterwards
by three Sundry Letters and Answers. But since they conceiued the
straitnesse of time (which they had drawne vpon themselues) was such,
that it would permit nothing to bee done at this time, Wee had giuen
order to adiourne the Parliament till the eighth of February next,
which was the first day Wee had formerly appointed for Our meeting
together._

_Wee were likewise pleased to say, that Wee could not omit to tell
them, that we expected other thankes from them, then they had sent
Vs at this time, namely for Our gracious promises to maintaine their
Priuiledges, as Our owne Soueraigne Prerogatiue: First contained in
Our Answere to their Petition, and afterwards as clearely explaned and
enlarged by Our next Letter to Secretarie_ Caluert, _as Our wits, for
their safetie, satisfaction and aduantage, could poßibly deuise; but
of this We heard nothing, being slipt by, and wholly omitted by them._




Which message was accordingly deliuered the next morning in the House
of Commons. But while We were busied at _Theobalds_ in receiuing
their Petition, and returning this answere agreeable to Our Grace and
good intention towards them, these mutinous and discontented spirits,
neuer giuing ouer their wicked purpose, began anew to stirre the
coles of discontentment amongst them; and making them beleeue, that
their Priuiledges were yet in danger (upon what ground God knowes,
Wee cannot imagine nor guesse) procured a Committee to be made for
taking their Liberties into consideration; where a Protection was
made, to whom Wee know not, concerning their Priuiledges, which they
pretended to bee violated by Our Letters and messages, and thereupon in
an vnseasonable houre, being sixe of the clocke at night, and a very
thinne House, scarcely comming to the third part of the full number,
contrary to their owne custome in all matters of weight, they conclude
and enter a Protestation for their Liberties, in such ambiguous and
generall words, as might serue for future times to inuade most of
those Rights and Prerogatiues annexed to Our Imperiall Crowne, as bee
the very markes and Characters of Monarchie and Souereigntie, and
whereof Wee found Our Crowne vndoubtedly possessed. For founding the
claime of their Priuiledges vpon the words of Our Writt for assembling
a Parliament, the contriuers of that Protestation craftily mentioned
some words, _viz._ _Super arduis Regni negotijs_, but of purpose left
out _quibusdam_, which restraines that generalitie to such particular
Cases, as Wee are to consult with them vpon. And the very vncontrolled
Custome of all times doeth manifestly prooue, that the King Himselfe,
or His Chancellour in his name, doeth at the very beginning of the
Parliament declare vnto them what things these _quibusdam_ are, wherein
hee craueth their aduice and assistance; And vse is euer the best
interpreter of words in a case of this nature: Vpon which vnduetifull
Protestation Wee were iustly occasioned to publish Our pleasure for
dissolution of the Parliament, as appeares by Our Proclamation.


[Illustration]

  Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL, Printers to the
               Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXI.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS MAIESTIES DECLARATION, TOUCHING HIS PROCEEDINGS IN THE LATE ASSEMBLIE AND CONUENTION OF PARLIAMENT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


