The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mentor: The Revolution, Vol. 1, Num. 43, Serial No. 43
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mentor: The Revolution, Vol. 1, Num. 43, Serial No. 43

Author: Albert Bushnell Hart

Release date: September 4, 2015 [eBook #49877]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE REVOLUTION, VOL. 1, NUM. 43, SERIAL NO. 43 ***

The Mentor 1913.12.08, No. 43, The Revolution




THE STORY OF AMERICA IN PICTURES

THE REVOLUTION

By ALBERT BUSHNELL HART

_Professor of Government, Harvard University_

[Illustration: GEORGE THE THIRD]

[Illustration: GEORGE WASHINGTON]

THE MENTOR

DECEMBER 8, 1913

SERIAL No. 43

DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY

MENTOR GRAVURES

    BATTLE OF LEXINGTON · BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL · WASHINGTON
    CROSSING THE DELAWARE · SIGNING OF THE DECLARATION OF
    INDEPENDENCE · “I HAVE NOT YET BEGUN TO FIGHT”--JOHN PAUL
    JONES · THE BIRTH OF THE FLAG


Words wear out after using them a thousand or a million times.
“Liberty,” “The Constitution,” “The People’s Government,”--people take
those terms into their minds nowadays as they take a chocolate cream,
without stopping to think of its contents. So with “Revolution.” When
we hear the word we feel a pleased sensation of a good, great, glorious
time, intended by Providence to prepare the way for our various
patriotic organizations. The Revolution? Why, yes, that was when our
forefathers tied the first hard knot in the British lion’s tail! All
the people were patriots, and all the patriots were as wise as college
professors, and as brave as Albanians, and as great as a president. All
the statesmen wore silk stockings and red velvet suits and powdered
wigs. All the ladies were lovely, and spurned the offers of marriage
made by British generals.


THE MILITARY REVOLUTION

[Illustration: GENERAL NATHANAEL GREENE

His courageous work in the South greatly helped the American
cause. (From painting in possession of the Historical Society of
Pennsylvania.)]

What is a revolution but an overturning, a spinning of the wheel, left
to right, and bottom come uppermost? Likewise, since the right believes
itself right, and the top is sure that the world exists in order that
it may be the top, most revolutions mean force, arms, big guns booming,
troops marching, bullets flying, heads cut off with axes or caught in
a hangman’s noose; also arms and legs cut off, and the ground soaked
with a crimson fluid. “You can’t make an omelet without breaking some
eggs,” and in a revolution there is bound to be breakage of heads and
hearts, and banks and constitutions.

We know that the American Revolution was a military contest, because
the pictures in our first textbook of American history show General
George Washington, in buff and blue, leading his Continentals up to
within sixteen feet and eight inches of General Howe, in a magnificent
red coat laced with gold, in vain trying to rally battalions of craven
Hessians wearing highly inconvenient bearskin caps.

[Illustration: THE BUNKER HILL MONUMENT]

Commanding officers of opposing armies are not really so intimate as
that; but Americans are justified in immense pride over the military
success of the Revolution. The simple fact was that three million
people, of whom about a fourth were negro slaves, put up a fight
against a mother country having four times their population. They began
without a single professional officer, except the traitor Charles Lee;
and with only a thousand or two men who had not seen military service
except militia training day, and desultory frontier warfare with French
and Indians. They had not one ship of war, not a factory of arms. Yet
they attacked the great British empire,--though it was flanked right
and left by the lion and the unicorn, trained by two centuries of
European wars, thousands of troops under arms, officers successful in
other fields,--and they sailed into the greatest naval power on the sea.

So far as power and prestige and experience decide wars in advance,
the Revolution was due to be snuffed out at the end of 1776; Benjamin
Franklin was destined to be hanged, George Washington to be immured for
life in a gloomy dungeon, dressed in a ball and chain. Were not the
English everywhere successful? They captured New York, they captured
Newport, they captured Philadelphia, they captured Savannah; they
were driven away from Charleston by the palmetto forts, but returned
and captured Richmond. They beat the Americans at Long Island, at the
Brandywine, at Germantown, at Camden. Their cruisers and privateers
swept the seas, until Nathaniel Tracy of Newburyport lost ninety of
his hundred and twenty vessels. They drove the little American navy
from the seas.

Yet in the end they were beaten. It is easy now to criticize the
strategy of Washington and Greene and the rest, and to show that by
all the laws of war they laid themselves open to defeat. Nothing can
alter the stubborn fact that the American militia at Bunker Hill for
hours held off a British army and so damaged it that it never took the
field again; then the Americans captured Burgoyne’s army at Saratoga in
1777, a humiliation seldom known in British annals. And this victory
brought the French alliance, and the aid of Von Steuben the magnificent
drill master, of d’Estaing and his fleet, of Rochambeau and his army.
With that aid, the Americans beat the second army at Yorktown, and that
ended the war. General Cornwallis had to surrender his sword to an
officer whom a few months before the British had addressed as “George
Washington, Esq., etc., etc.”

[Illustration: SURRENDER OF BURGOYNE AT SARATOGA

This picture, from a painting by Trumbull, the famous American artist,
shows the surrender of the English general John Burgoyne to the
Americans at Saratoga, New York, on October 17, 1777.]


EXTRAORDINARY AMERICAN SUCCESS

In one way the Americans were too successful. Beginning with raw
militia, ill-equipped, worse disciplined, the Americans made an army
that beat the British. General Washington never ceased to implore
Congress and the states to give him a better system for a real national
army. Half the men and a fourth of the money expended would have done
the job just as well, if the advice of Washington and other experts had
been followed.

[Illustration: SURRENDER OF CORNWALLIS

The British general, Lord Cornwallis, surrendered to Washington at
Yorktown, Virginia, on October 19, 1781. The victory virtually decided
the Revolution in favor of the Americans.]

On the sea also the Americans began a great career of naval success;
or, rather, they repeated the methods of earlier wars by sending
out a hornets’ nest of privateers, christened with such gallant and
suggestive names as The Charming Peggy, The Fair Lady, The American
Revenue, The Black Joke, The Fair America, The Scotch Irish, The Skunk,
The Nimble Shilling, and The King Tamer. If they did not tame George
III, they did tame the British merchant and his representatives in
Parliament; for American privateers in the course of the war captured
about seven hundred British merchantmen.

[Illustration: SURRENDER MONUMENT YORKTOWN, VIRGINIA]

[Illustration: GENERAL LORD CORNWALLIS]

And then there was the American navy; or rather John Paul Jones, for
in him the navy was concentrated. It was a painful surprise to the
British to have the royal frigate Serapis taken in 1779 by the Bonhomme
(Bo-nom) Richard, a condemned merchant ship hastily fitted out in
France. Jones is already a sort of mythical figure, partly because of
Buell’s imaginary so-called biography; but he is the naval father of
Hull and Porter, and the grandfather of Farragut and another Porter,
and the great-grandfather of Sampson and Dewey.


THE CIVIL REVOLUTION

A revolutionary overturning came whenever the Union Jack was hauled
down and the Stars and Stripes hauled up. But the revolutionary army
was not the Revolution: it was like the line in a football match,
desperately holding back the other line while the backs get into play.
The real Revolution was an overturning of governments, and charters,
and political power. The revolving wheel whirled the old colonies out
of existence, and cunningly framed and polished new state governments.
The Revolution turned the British empire down, and pushed the United
States of America up. The Revolution rolled to the bottom of the wheel
Governor Gage of Massachusetts, and Governor Tryon of North Carolina,
and Governor Dunmore of Virginia; and up to the top revolved Patrick
Henry, and Benjamin Franklin, and John Adams. The Revolution was like a
religious conversion: it set the American people out of their old ways,
and into a new upward path.

[Illustration: JOHN PAUL JONES

Commander of the first American navy. From the portrait by C. W. Peale.]

[Illustration: BIRTHPLACE OF JOHN PAUL JONES

John Paul Jones, the “founder of the American navy,” was born in this
cottage at Kirkbean, in Scotland, in 1747. He died in Paris in 1792.]

All that seems natural to us; for we have been brought up on the
tyranny of George III, and the misgovernment and plunder of the
colonies by the British government. We realize the bad state of things
much better than did the Americans at the beginning of the Revolution.
In truth the colonies were freer from harsh and arbitrary government
than England, Scotland, and Wales, to say nothing of what was then the
separate kingdom of Ireland. Every colony had its local assembly: not a
single English county had one. In every colony any freeman who had the
necessary pluck and health could acquire land and become a voter: in
England not a twentieth part of the adult men could vote. The colonists
laid their own taxes and expended them for their own purposes:
Englishmen paid taxes levied by a Parliament over which only a few of
them had control.

Apparently the main cause of the Revolution was that the colonists
could do so much for themselves that there was no reason why they
should not do substantially everything for themselves. They had a
personal attachment for England, the king, and the English system of
government, very like that now felt by the Canadians, and would have
been quite satisfied with the degree of self government that England
has since freely given to Canada. John Adams says, “That there existed
a general desire of independence of the Crown in any part of America
before the Revolution, is as far from the truth as the zenith is from
the nadir.”

[Illustration: OLD BELFRY, LEXINGTON MASSACHUSETTS

From this belfry was rung out the alarm on the morning of April 19,
1775, calling the minute men to assemble on the common.]

[Illustration: PAUL REVERE’S HOME IN BOSTON

The tablet that may be seen between the second and third stories of the
house was placed there by the Paul Revere Chapter of the Daughters of
the American Revolution.]

[Illustration: PAUL REVERE

From the painting by the famous American artist, Gilbert Stuart.]

Then why revolt, especially when above a third of the thinking people
in America were opposed to the Revolution, and had to be driven out
or silenced? To the original grievances of the Revolution was added a
stupid John Bull obstinacy, concentrated in George III, but shared by
a good part of the British nation. These mistakes made by England are
a fine example of what comes to a country that falls into the hands of
what are called the “Interests”; for Parliament was really nothing but
a combine of great titled families, who took in some representatives
of the cities and the merchant class. One of the best results of the
Revolution was that it shook up the British aristocracy; and the best
proof that the Revolution was right is the admission of Lord North,
when the war was all over, that it had been a great mistake, but that
the nation had made it, and not simply the prime minister.

The Revolution was worth all the blood and treasure that it cost,
because it lighted a new torch of popular government. There had been
plenty of government of the people in ancient and medieval times;
but at the epoch of the American Revolution the formerly democratic
Swiss and Dutch, and the free citizens of the German and French and
Spanish cities, had lost faith in themselves. It was fashionable to
revere Demosthenes and Cato and Brutus and the _Populus Romanus_; but
real republican government had about ceased on the earth when the new
constellation of the United States appeared on the horizon.

The colonies had very tidy little governments, schools of politics,
in which the speaker of the assembly was commonly the leader of a
healthy opposition to the governor; and on that foundation they built
tidy little state governments, which showed the prevalent belief that
governors were dangerous creatures who ought to have as little power
as possible; while legislatures were a reflection of the people’s will
which could not err. The wheel of revolution has twirled backward in
our day; for we make governors and presidents great political leaders,
and set our legislators on a one-legged race against the initiative
and referendum. In the midst of the confusion of the Revolution,
when town after town was picked up by the British, and nobody knew
whether the Revolution would win out, it is wonderful how well the
state governments worked, and how successful they were in putting on
record the great principle of the two kinds of law,--fundamental or
constitutional law, and statute law.

[Illustration: PATRICK HENRY ADDRESSING THE VIRGINIA ASSEMBLY IN 1765.

He is famous for his speech supporting the resolutions to resist the
Stamp Act. At one point he exclaimed, “Caesar had his Brutus, Charles
the First his Cromwell, and George the Third”--“Treason! treason!”
shouted the Speaker of the Assembly, “Treason! treason!” shouted the
members--“and,” Henry continued, “George the Third may profit by their
example. If this be treason, make the most of it!”]

[Illustration: THE CHAIR AND TABLE USED AT THE SIGNING OF THE
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE]

The finest work of the Revolution was the making of a national
government; for which the army and the navy were in part responsible,
because a central national power was all that could save the army from
capture and the navy from destruction. The Continental Congress became
a government before it knew it, authorizing an army and navy, borrowing
money, issuing many times more paper notes than it could ever redeem,
appointing George Washington commander in chief of the Continental
forces, sending ambassadors to foreign countries.

Were men greater on the average then than now? Would Speaker Clark and
Senator Lodge of Massachusetts, and Senator Beveridge bulk as big as
Patrick Henry and Sam Adams and John Dickinson, if revolution broke out
now? “These are the times that try men’s souls,” said Tom Paine, and
it was also a time that made men’s souls! The one indispensable man in
the Revolution was George Washington; for there was no other in the
colonies who was so central, so immovable, a force. But the Revolution
would also have failed but for Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson,
and the other civilians who built up the new government.

[Illustration: BENJAMIN FRANKLIN]

[Illustration: THOMAS JEFFERSON]


THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

[Illustration: THE SIGNING OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

From the painting by John Trumbull.]

[Illustration: OLD STATE HOUSE IN BOSTON

A crowd listening to the reading of the Declaration of Independence.]

And they framed the Declaration of Independence! They framed it; but
Thomas Jefferson wrote it. He was bent on proving that the Revolution
was right. And, having taken an unpaid brief for his country, he found
twenty-seven good reasons for independence, even at the cost of a
bloody revolution. Those reasons are not the Declaration: the real pith
of that splendidly written document is the brief statement of “self
evident truths”; among them “that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights,
that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness,
that to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.” Some
of the states made much longer and fuller statements of the same
kind; but this is the bedrock of popular government in America. Time
cannot tarnish, use cannot diminish, age cannot weaken, this splendid
thought that God Almighty sends His children into the world with equal
political rights; that every human being has an interest in that mutual
understanding with other human beings called society and government.

[Illustration: SAMUEL ADAMS

From the painting by the early American artist, J. S. Copley.]


SOCIAL AND COMMERCIAL REVOLUTION

When Rip Van Winkle came back home he found a new set of neighbors who
scoffed at good King George. The Americans lived in a changed world. In
the South most of the political leaders who were not Englishmen took
the patriots’ side,--the Randolphs, and the Peytons, and the Carrolls,
and the Rutledges, and the Pinckneys, and the Haynes,--and when the war
was over the wheel had revolved under them, but left them still at the
top. In the North there was a greater change,--Sam Adams, the untitled
leader of the Boston town meeting, became leader of Massachusetts; John
Hancock, the merchant accused of smuggling, was governor; John Adams,
the struggling lawyer, was minister to England. Where were the rich and
fashionable people who lived in the fine colonial mansions and drank
too much Madeira? Hundreds of them gone, exiled, driven forth, farming
in the eastern townships of Canada, waiting in the antechambers of the
great in London.

[Illustration: PARSON CLARK’S HOUSE, LEXINGTON

Here Samuel Adams and John Hancock were sleeping when aroused by Paul
Revere on his famous ride on April 19, 1775.]

[Illustration: JOHN HANCOCK’S HOUSE IN BOSTON

Interesting not only in its historic associations, but as an attractive
example of colonial architecture.]


EFFECTS OF THE WAR

That was a revolution that reached the wives and daughters, and the
handsome sons who inherited their fathers’ silken suits and had
expected to inherit their dignities. It took the Americans thirty years
to find out how great a revolution they had undergone in business;
for when the war was over they had an unpatriotic hankering for the
broadcloths and kerseymeres of old England. For their women folk,
dealers still bought calimancos, and paduasoys, and oznabrig linens,
and India muslins, through reliable English houses. Again Great
Britain made the mistake of undervaluing the Americans; and when they
became independent told them to be independent--and suffer for it. Now
that the United States of America was a separate nation, let it keep
its vessels out of the trade with the former sister colonies! It took
long years to open up other avenues of trade.


REVOLUTION IN THE WEST

Within the military and civic Revolution arose another territorial
revolution. When in 1778 George Rogers Clark with his few score
frontiersmen slipped down the Ohio River and picked up the little
British towns of Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes, he was blazing
the trail into the West, and opening that vast country to millions of
Americans still to be born or adopted, till they would in the end rule
the republic. Because of Rogers Clark, or rather of the westward vision
of the great men of that time, Great Britain gave up the Northwest,
and then yielded the Southwest. With all its boldness and courage, the
Revolution did not make a complete nation: to become a world power,
it was necessary to cross the mountains and bind the Mississippi to
the sea. And the man of that time, who was at the same time eastern
and western, who fought the French and took up lands and planned roads
and canals beyond the mountains, was George Washington, the greatest
soldier, best statesman, and most clear-sighted business man of the
Revolution.

[Illustration: GEORGE ROGERS CLARK

An American general who in 1778 captured Vincennes from the British.
It was soon recaptured; but Clark took it again after a terrible march
across country in midwinter. He then conquered all the country near the
Wabash and Illinois rivers.]

[Illustration: MERIWETHER LEWIS

Companion of William Clark in his western explorations.]

    SUPPLEMENTARY READING.--“American Revolution,” Claude H. Van
    Tyne; “American Revolution,” John Fiske; “American Revolution”
    (3 vols.), George Otto Trevelyan; “Struggle for American
    Independence” (2 vols.), S. G. Fisher; “George Washington” (5
    vols.), John Marshall; “American Statesmen” series (16 vols.);
    “Literary History of the American Revolution” (2 vols.),
    Moses Coit Tyler; “Paul Jones,” Norman Hapgood; “Letters and
    Memoirs,” Madame Rediesel; “The Spy,” James Fenimore Cooper;
    “Hugh Wynne,” S. Weir Mitchell; “The Partisan,” William Gilmore
    Simms; “Alice of Old Vincennes,” James Maurice Thompson.




THE MENTOR

ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY BY

The Mentor Association, Inc.

381 Fourth Ave., New York, N. Y.

    Volume 1      Number 43

    ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY
    CENTS, FOREIGN POSTAGE, 75 CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE, 50
    CENTS EXTRA. ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK, N. Y.,
    AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER. COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR
    ASSOCIATION, INC., PRESIDENT AND TREASURER, R. M. DONALDSON;
    VICE-PRESIDENT, W. M. SANFORD; SECRETARY, L. D. GARDNER.


_Editorial_

In the early part of the nineteenth century the United States
Government realized the importance of having a record on canvas of
the nation’s great historical events, and several painters of that
day produced pictures that hold places of honor in our Government
buildings. John Trumbull was the foremost of these painters.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been a demand for several years for new historic paintings.
The feeling exists that the painters of one hundred years ago could not
have the perspective to portray the Revolution correctly, no more than
a historian of the same period could write its history. The time has
come for modern artists in American historic art. The World’s Fair at
Chicago gave an impetus to the work, especially in decorative form. As
a result, public buildings erected within the past twenty years show
many interesting and distinguished examples of historic art in mural
decorations, by such artists as Blashfield, Kenyon Cox, C. Y. Turner,
and others. There is a demand now from many sources--from galleries,
Federal and state governments, and from schools--for historical
pictures which shall be true and shall also be worthy examples of
modern work.

       *       *       *       *       *

This number of The Mentor contains four distinguished examples of
modern historical art. Three of them are the work of Mr. Henry Mosler,
and were painted within the past five years.

Mr. Mosler has been known as an artist of great distinction for a
long time. As early as 1874 he won a medal at the Royal Academy of
Munich, and he won the Thomas B. Clarke prize in the National Academy
of Design, New York, in 1896. Mr. Mosler, therefore, brought the ripe
powers of a master painter to the work, and he has produced four
paintings of great art value and historic importance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first picture, which appeared four years ago, is entitled “Ring,
Ring, for Liberty,” and represents, with great strength and vigor, the
old bell ringer in the cupola of Independence Hall, who sounded the
note of liberty in July, 1776. Three years ago Mr. Mosler finished
his painting of Betsy Ross and her companions making the first flag,
which is reproduced in this number of The Mentor. Mr. Mosler based his
work on careful sketches made in the Betsy Ross house on Arch Street,
Philadelphia. Our readers will surely feel the grace and charm as well
as the vital interest of this picture.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many have said that our country needed a new painting of “Washington
Crossing the Delaware.” The familiar composition, by Leutze, is
regarded as stiff and constrained and as lacking a sense of reality.
Mr. Mosler’s picture gives a true and spirited conception of the event,
based on historical study and on sketches made in the winter time at
the point of the Delaware where Washington crossed. The painting of
Paul Jones is a vivid dramatic presentment of a historical subject that
has never heretofore been pictured in an adequate manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another interesting picture in this group is the “Signing of the
Declaration of Independence,” by Miss Sarah Ball Dodson. The actual
life and spirit of the scenes in Independence Hall during July, 1776,
have not been fully realized by other artists. Miss Dodson’s picture is
a striking presentment of the scene, distinguished not only for its art
value but for its truth. Each figure is an actual portrait and takes an
earnest, living part in the composition. Miss Dodson was a native of
Philadelphia, and knew her subject at first hand. Her death some years
ago was a distinct loss to American art.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF LEXINGTON]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_The Battle of Lexington and Concord_

ONE


It was a little after midnight on April 19, 1775. In the little village
of Lexington, Massachusetts, not far from Boston, all was quiet. The
townspeople were sleeping soundly. Suddenly there was the clatter of
galloping hoofs, and a horseman, leaping from the saddle before the
first house, knocked on its door and shouted, “The British are coming!”
That man was Paul Revere, and having roused the village he rode quickly
on his way toward Concord.

Lexington, which had been so still a little while before, was now
a scene of busy activity. Church bells were ringing, and cannons
were booming to warn all the surrounding country. The minutemen were
cleaning and loading their muskets; while the women filled powder
horns. Soon everything was ready, and the little band of seventy
minutemen of Lexington, under command of Captain Jonas Parker, gathered
on the village common. There, with grim determination, they formed in
line and waited. And there, at daybreak, the force of eight hundred
British found them.

“Disperse! Disperse, you rebels!” cried Major Pitcairn, in command of
the English. “Down with your arms, and disperse!”

No reply from the minutemen.

“Fire, then!” ordered Pitcairn.

His command was obeyed, and the minutemen answered with “the shot
heard round the world.” The Revolution was begun. Eight minutemen were
killed, several others were wounded, and the rest were scattered. Then
the British advanced toward Concord.

Their object was to capture some arms and ammunition of the Colonists
which were stored near Concord. For this reason General Gage had sent
them from Boston. Paul Revere had waited until a signal told him that
they were crossing the Charles River, and then had made his famous ride
to alarm the patriots.

When the British reached Concord they found that the stores had been
removed and hidden, and a large force of minutemen waiting for them.
The patriots were without uniforms, and were armed with all kinds of
weapons, even pitchforks and scythes; but they were determined to
protect their homes, and were willing to die if necessary.

Against such brave resistance even the large force of English soldiers
could do nothing, and after a few volleys they began a retreat toward
Boston. But now the whole country was aroused. The retreating soldiers
were fired upon all along the road. Shots came with deadly aim from
behind fences, stone walls, and trees.

At last reinforcements came to the English. Their retreat became less
of a rout, and they finally reached Charlestown, and from there crossed
over to Boston the next morning. They lost 273 men; while the Americans
lost 103. The Colonists had won the first encounter in the Revolution.

The battle of Lexington and Concord stirred all thirteen colonies to
action. Everywhere there was unanimous determination to resist British
opposition. There could be no going back now. Blood had been shed, and
the Revolution had begun.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL

PAINTING BY JOHN TRUMBULL]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_Bunker Hill_

TWO


After the battle of Lexington and Concord, England saw that the
resistance of the Colonists was determined, and sent reinforcements to
General Gage in Boston. By the end of May, 1775, he had 10,000 trained
soldiers under his command. The American force besieging him amounted
to about 16,000 men, undisciplined, but brave. The British were
virtually held prisoners in Boston.

General Gage therefore decided to sally out on the night of June 18 and
capture Bunker Hill near Charlestown. But first he proclaimed martial
law and pardon for all those who would lay down their arms and return
home, except Samuel Adams and John Hancock. None of the courageous
patriots took advantage of his offer.

The Americans discovered Gage’s plans, and decided to beat him to it.
So on the evening of June 16 Colonel William Prescott with 1,000 men
was ordered to march to Bunker Hill and fortify it. But when they got
there it was decided that Breeds Hill, much nearer Boston, would give
a better command of the town and shipping. Under Prescott and General
Israel Putnam the colonial soldiers worked all night building a redoubt
about eight rods square.

When the British sentinels looked up through the mist the next morning
(June 17, 1775) they rubbed their eyes in astonishment at sight of
the fortifications. The guns from the vessels in the Charles River
immediately opened fire; but the Colonists kept steadily at work. At
last the redoubt was finished, and the tools were sent to Bunker Hill.

But by this time General Gage had ordered an attack on Breeds
Hill. Three thousand picked soldiers landed at the eastern base of
the hill, and a little after three o’clock in the afternoon began
their advance. The tired Americans, who had been working all night
at the intrenchments, expected to be relieved by others; but the
reinforcements did not come. Nevertheless, they did not falter for an
instant. Steadily up the hill came the level ranks of the Redcoats.

“Wait till you can see the whites of their eyes!” was the order.

Nearer and nearer came the British. Still not a movement from the
redoubt. It was believed that the Colonials had fled.

But no! Suddenly, at the word “Fire!” fifteen hundred of the concealed
patriots rose and poured such a deadly rain of bullets upon the English
that whole companies were wiped out. Pellmell down the slope ran the
terrified British; while a shout of triumph rose from the redoubt. But
at the bottom their officers beat them back into line, and the attack
was begun once more. Charlestown was set afire by Gage’s orders. This
infuriated the Americans, and again the English were driven back down
the hill in disorder.

Then came the third attack. The ammunition of the Colonists was giving
out. Only a few more shots remained, and after this the Americans
retreated in good order across Charlestown Neck. The British had won
a technical victory; but at terrible cost--1,054 killed and wounded
out of 2,500 engaged. The American loss was 450, among this number the
brave General Warren.

This battle, which took place on Breeds Hill, has always been known as
the battle of Bunker Hill. It lasted two hours.

The cornerstone of the Bunker Hill Monument was laid on Breeds Hill on
the fiftieth anniversary of the battle, June 17, 1825. Daniel Webster’s
speech on this occasion is well known as a great piece of oratory. The
monument is an obelisk, 221 feet high and 30 feet square at the base.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: © THE KNAPP CO., INC., N. Y.

WASHINGTON CROSSING THE DELAWARE

PAINTING BY HENRY MOSLER]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_The Battle of Trenton_

THREE


In December, 1776, the hopes of the Colonists were at the lowest ebb.
The American cause was almost lost. It was one of the most critical
situations in the whole Revolution. The British occupied New York and
all New Jersey, and so confident were they of success that troops were
being sent back to England. One false move would plunge the colonies
into immediate defeat. It was George Washington who saved the day in
this dark time.

Colonel Rall was at Trenton, New Jersey, with 1,500 Hessians,
soldiers whom England had hired from Germany. The American army under
Washington, beaten and discouraged, but always ready and able to fight,
was on the other side of the Delaware, at a point a few miles above
Trenton.

Rall despised the Colonials. He did not plant a single cannon. “What
need of intrenchments?” he said. “Let the rebels come. We will at them
with the bayonet.”

Washington planned to attack Trenton secretly on Christmas night. He
knew that, according to their custom, the Hessians would celebrate
Christmas Day with a long carousal, and figured that they would be in
no condition to put up a strong resistance in the cold, gray dawn of
December 26. So, on the evening of December 25, Washington prepared to
cross the Delaware above Trenton with about 2,000 men.

General Gates was to lead 10,000 from below Trenton; but, jealous of
Washington, he refused to obey, and rode to Baltimore to intrigue in
Congress for General Schuyler’s place in the north.

Washington proposed to cross the Delaware at McConkey’s Ferry, now
Taylorsville. It was a terrible journey. The river was full of floating
ice, the current was swift, and about midnight a fierce storm of snow
and sleet set in. At last, at four A. M., all the men and guns stood on
the Jersey shore.

The army then moved on Trenton as fast as possible in two divisions;
but it was broad daylight before it reached the town. There it was
discovered by the enemy’s pickets. These fired immediately, and the
sound woke Colonel Rall and his officers who were sleeping off their
debauch. Rall roused his men, and placing himself at their head gave
battle to the Americans. The fight lasted only thirty-five minutes. The
Hessians were defeated, and sent flying toward Princeton, and Colonel
Rall was mortally wounded.

It was a magnificent victory. One thousand prisoners, 1,200 small
arms, six brass field guns, and all the German flags were captured.
It is evidence of Washington’s genius that, against overwhelming odds
and in the face of every discouragement, he was able to seize such an
opportunity to turn the darkness of defeat into the glory of victory.
By this bold stroke he so strengthened the cause of the colonies that
they were finally able to win out.

The spot where Washington crossed the Delaware is to be perpetuated
as a public park. One hundred acres, comprising the tract called
“Washington’s Crossing,” have been purchased by action of a commission,
and the place will be a permanent memorial of the turning point of the
Revolution.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: © THE KNAPP CO., INC.

THE SIGNING OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

PAINTING BY SARAH PAXTON BALL DODSON]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_The Declaration of Independence_

FOUR


The Declaration of Independence was a big step for the thirteen brave
little colonies to make. Until then they had only been fighting
for their rights as colonies of England,--“No taxation without
representation.” But after the Declaration of Independence they were
battling as a separate country, and if conquered would have had to
suffer the fate of rebels and traitors. Congress knew that if America
declared itself free from England the aid of France might be hoped for,
and this help might decide the whole outcome of the struggle. Besides
they had come to a point where they could no longer fight as colonies,
but must unite as a separate and independent country.

So on June 7, 1776, a committee was appointed to draw up a Declaration
of Independence, which should be prefaced by a clear explanation of
the causes that made the colonies adopt it. This committee consisted
of Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, and
Robert R. Livingston.

After a long discussion the committee decided to have Jefferson make
out a copy of the Declaration. His draft was amended slightly, and then
reported to Congress as a whole. Here the debate was very warm. Some of
the representatives did not want to vote for independence at all. They
considered it a too violent move. But at that time the voting was done
by colonies, and it soon appeared that the Declaration, much amended,
would finally be passed by most of them.

At last, on the Fourth of July, 1776, the Declaration was put up to
be voted upon. Pennsylvania voted for independence, a majority of her
representatives being favorable, and other colonies soon followed.
Delaware had three delegates; but one of them, Caesar Rodney, was
absent, over eighty miles from Philadelphia. McKean, one of the two
others, burning with a desire to have the vote of his colony recorded
in the affirmative, sent a man on a fast horse to bring him back. Ten
minutes after receiving McKean’s message Rodney was in the saddle, and,
riding all night, he reached Independence Hall in Philadelphia on July
4, just in time to secure the vote of Delaware in favor of independence.

Although it was on July 4, 1776, that the Declaration of Independence
was adopted by Congress, it was not signed by all the delegates present
at that time; but they all signed before the end of the year.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: © THE KNAPP CO., INC.

“I HAVE NOT YET BEGUN TO FIGHT”--JOHN PAUL JONES

PAINTING BY HENRY MOSLER]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_John Paul Jones_

FIVE


“I have not yet begun to fight!” These words of the famous sea fighter,
John Paul Jones, commander of the first American navy, have rung down
through the years as typical of the man that spoke them. Pleasant
mannered and affable in peace, he was a brave and able fighter when
there was a time for it. John Paul Jones was born on July 6, 1747,
in Scotland. His father was John Paul, a gardener, and the future
admiral took the name Jones about 1773 out of regard for Willie Jones,
a wealthy planter and political leader of North Carolina, who had
befriended him in his days of poverty.

John Paul went to sea at the age of twelve, and before he was nineteen
became first mate of a vessel in the slave trade. But he did not
like this kind of work, and after two voyages gave up his position
and sailed for England. Both captain and mate of the ship on which
he was a passenger died of fever on the way home, and he brought the
vessel safely into port. For this he received part of the cargo and a
captaincy from the owners. But after making several voyages he suddenly
resigned for some unknown reason and went to America, to live in
poverty until 1775.

Then when the Revolution began John Paul Jones was made a first
lieutenant in the navy by the Continental Congress, on December
22, 1775. He soon became a captain, and did much damage to British
shipping. For his good work he was promoted to the rank of commodore
and put in command of five ships. He called his flagship the Bonhomme
Richard, in honor of Benjamin Franklin, whose “Poor Richard’s Almanac”
was very popular at that time.

On August 14, 1779, Jones sailed from France with his squadron of five,
accompanied by two French privateers. All but two of his ships soon
deserted him; but he kept on his course, and at seven o’clock on the
evening of September 23 he sighted the British men-of-war, the Serapis
and the Countess of Scarborough. One of his own ships fled immediately;
but the fearless American commander attacked the huge Serapis with
his little Bonhomme Richard. The Pallas, Jones’ other remaining ship,
forced the Countess of Scarborough to surrender; but it seemed at first
as if the Richard was doomed. The English commander asked Jones if
he wanted to strike his colors; but the courageous American shouted
back, “I have not yet begun to fight!” And he proved this by finally
compelling the Serapis to surrender after a fierce battle of three
hours and a half. It was a glorious victory against overwhelming odds.

The Bonhomme Richard was almost a total wreck. However, Jones moved his
men and supplies to the Serapis. Two days later his little flagship
sank.

On his return to France Jones was hailed as a great hero. Louis XVI
gave him a gold-hilted sword and made him a chevalier of France, and in
1787 Congress awarded him a gold medal in recognition of his services.

In 1788 he entered the Russian navy as a rear admiral; but he was
disappointed in his hope of advancement. Owing to the jealousy of
Russian officers he was relieved of his command, and in 1790 returned
to Paris, where he died on July 18, 1792.

Jones was buried in the St. Louis cemetery for foreign Protestants,
where his body was finally discovered over a hundred years later. In
July, 1905, a fleet of American warships carried the body to Annapolis,
where it now rests in one of the buildings of the naval academy.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: © W. M. SANFORD

BIRTH OF THE FLAG

PAINTING BY HENRY MOSLER]




_THE REVOLUTION_

_The Birth of the Flag_

SIX


The men of the colonies were the ones who did the actual fighting that
won American independence; but the brave women of those times also
played their part. It was the courageous confidence and fortitude of
their wives and sisters that spurred the men on to final victory. Some
of the women had even a more active share than this in the Revolution.
Betsy Ross, who made the first flag of the United States, was one of
these.

When the colonies first rebelled against the tyrannical rule of Great
Britain each was a separate unit in itself. Each had its own system of
government, and each its own flag. In no way except by a common feeling
against the injustice of the mother country were they bound together.
Besides the thirteen different banners of the colonies, there were
various regimental ensigns, and all sorts of other flags, with pine
trees on them, or the words “Liberty or Death” and “Don’t Tread on Me”;
but there was no American national flag.

So, after the Declaration of Independence had stated that the colonies
would no longer be bound to England, Congress passed this resolution
on June 14, 1777: “Resolved, That the flag of the United States be
thirteen stripes, alternate red and white; that the union be thirteen
stars, white on a blue field, representing a new constellation.”

About a month previous Congress had appointed General Washington,
Robert Morris, and Colonel Ross a committee to get a flag designed
and made. These three men went to Betsy Ross in her little upholstery
shop on Arch Street, Philadelphia, and asked her to make a flag after
the design they showed her. She agreed to do it, and suggested that
the stars, which Washington had drawn with six points, be made with
five. Her suggestion was carried out. For several years she and her
assistants made flags for our government. Her house on Arch Street is
still standing.

The United States flag was first blown over a military post at Fort
Schuyler, on the present site of Rome, New York. The fort was besieged
early in August, 1777. The garrison was without a flag; so it made one
according to the design of Congress by cutting up sheets to form the
white stripes, and bits of scarlet cloth for the red stripes. The blue
ground for the stars was made of pieces of a cloth cloak belonging to
Captain Abraham Swartwout.

John Paul Jones is supposed to have been the first to fly the Stars and
Stripes over a naval vessel. This ship was the Ranger, to which he was
appointed in 1777.

On December 5, 1782, the day when George III acknowledged the
independence of the United States, J. S. Copley, the great early
American artist, painted the flag in the background of a portrait he
was doing of Elkanah Watson.

The flag was not changed until 1795, when two stripes and two stars
were added for Vermont and Kentucky. But it was realized that there
must be a limit to the stripes, and on April 4, 1818, a recommendation
was adopted that the flag be permanently thirteen stripes, representing
the thirteen original states, and that a new star be added for each
state admitted.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 1, No. 43. SERIAL No. 43
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE REVOLUTION, VOL. 1, NUM. 43, SERIAL NO. 43 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


