The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mentor: Makers of Modern Opera, Vol. 1, Num. 47, Serial No. 47
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mentor: Makers of Modern Opera, Vol. 1, Num. 47, Serial No. 47

Author: Henry Edward Krehbiel

Release date: September 10, 2015 [eBook #49932]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA, VOL. 1, NUM. 47, SERIAL NO. 47 ***

The Mentor, No. 47, Makers of Modern Opera




MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA

_By_ H. E. KREHBIEL

_Author and Music Critic_

[Illustration: WAGNER]

[Illustration: VERDI]

THE MENTOR

SERIAL No. 47

[Illustration]

DEPARTMENT OF FINE ARTS

    MENTOR GRAVURES

    VERDI · MASSENET · PUCCINI · STRAUSS · GOUNOD · HUMPERDINCK


The form of entertainment called opera had its origin a little more
than three centuries ago in an effort made by a company of scholars and
musical amateurs in Florence to rescue music from the artificiality
into which the composers, who were all churchmen, had forced it.

The Florentine group had convinced themselves by study that music
had been effectively linked with poetry and action in the Greek
stage-plays, and in striving to imitate these they created the art-form
which in time came to be called “opera”--though at first it was known
by names all more or less closely connected with the terms which the
composers of today use to describe their dramatic works,--lyric dramas,
musical dramas, and so forth. The new style quickly spread over Europe,
and inasmuch as Italy was the home of music, it retained for a time
the Italian language and the style of musical composition evolved
by its creators. Soon other nations, impelled by a desire to hear
the new lyric plays, began to translate the Italian books into their
own languages. This brought with it a recognition of the incongruity
between Italian music and the French, German, and English languages,
and the dramatic poets and musicians of these countries began to seek
more satisfactory idioms in which to express their ideals. Thus there
came into existence the three great schools of operatic composers whose
latterday representatives are here considered.

[Illustration: GAETANO DONIZETTI]

Two men mark the point of departure of the lyric drama of today from
the general style which characterized opera all the world over during
the first two centuries following its invention. They are Verdi
(vair-dee), the Italian, and Wagner (vahg´-ner), the German; and,
strangely enough, they were both born in 1813. The latter exercised an
influence which was universal, and Verdi fell under it.

[Illustration: GIOACHINO ROSSINI]


THE GLORY OF VERDI

But neither in precept nor in practice was the great Italian brought
to disavow the native genius of his people. That is the great glory of
Verdi. For decade after decade he kept pace with his German rival in
the march toward truthfulness and variety of expression in the lyric
drama; but never did he forget that the first, the elemental, appeal
which music makes is through melody. His conception of melody changed
as his artistic nature grew and ripened; but song, vocal melody, is as
dominant a factor in his first successful opera, “Nabuco,” performed
in 1842, as it is in “Falstaff,” which he gave to the world fifty-one
years later. Verdi’s music illustrates every step of progress which
Italian opera has taken, from the time when Rossini overcame the
taste formed by the last masters of the eighteenth century till the
advent of the impetuous champions of realism who disputed popularity
with him in the closing years of the nineteenth. His ideals when he
wrote “Oberto” in 1839 were those of his immediate predecessors,
Bellini (bel-lee´-nee) and Donizetti (don-nee-dzet´-tee); but his
voice was ruder,--so rude, indeed, as to lead Rossini (ros-see´-nee)
to describe him as a “musician with a helmet.” This rudeness was the
first expression of his desire for passionate and truthful expression,
a desire which at the height of his spontaneous creative powers reached
its finest flower in the final trio of “Il Trovatore” and final quartet
of “Rigoletto,” two examples of operatic writing which are as good in
their way as any that French or German opera has to show.

[Illustration: VERDI’S BIRTHPLACE AND HIS HOME]

It is no depreciation of the mature and perfect Verdi of “Otello”
and “Falstaff” to say that he reached the climax of his melodic
inventiveness in “Il Trovatore” (tro-vah-to´-re), “Traviata”
(trah-vee-ah´-tah), and “Rigoletto” (ree-go-let´-to), and that “Aïda”
(ah-ee´-dah), which is now his most universally admired work, is
such because it is a product of his combined melodic inspiration
and his marvelous judgment, skill, and taste, developed by study
and reflection. The greater charm which “Aïda” exerts now is due as
much to the advanced ideals of the public, which Wagner was largely
instrumental in creating, as to the refined and deepened sense of
dramatic propriety and beauty which Verdi discloses in its melody,
harmony, and instrumentation.

[Illustration: GIUSEPPE VERDI

From a painting by Millicovitz.]

[Illustration: LA SCALA OPERA HOUSE

Where many of Verdi’s works had their first performance.]

If his mind was more impetuous in the sixth decade of the last century
than in the tenth, it was of infinitely finer fiber at the last. When
his creative impulses came to wait upon reflection his music showed
much nicer adjustment of the poetical and musical elements than had
prevailed in his works thitherto, his harmonies became richer, the
blatancy of his orchestration disappeared, and his instruments became
more beautiful and truthful associates in expression with the singers
of the drama than they had ever been. When he reached “Falstaff” and
“Otello” the last bit of slag which had vulgarized his earlier works
was cast aside, and he stepped forth as full an exemplar of national
art as Wagner. In this last incarnation of the Italian spirit he
was helped by his collaborator Boito (bo-ee´-to), a poet as well
as a composer, and therefore a type of the true dramatic artist as
he existed in ancient Greece, and as Wagner conceived him when he
projected his Artwork of the Future. It was Verdi’s association with
Boito which was largely responsible for the fact that he became the
successor as he had been the predecessor of Mascagni (mahs-kahn´-yee).

After the death of Verdi nobody was readier to concede how much he
had meant to Italian art than Mascagni, who had been the first to
profit by the revolt against Verdi which came with the advent of
Wagner’s art in Italy. When “Lohengrin” (lo´-en-grin) made its way into
Florence and other places many pupils at the conservatories forsook
Verdi and followed Wagner. The effect may have been a good one. There
can scarcely be a doubt but that it was to turn his hotheaded young
countrymen back to the path which he knew to be the only correct one
for them that Verdi made his supreme effort in his last two works.
Under the new influence the young Italians had plunged headforemost
into realism of the crassest sort, and that they might follow a vulgar
bent for lurid expression they went to the Neapolitan slums for their
subjects.

[Illustration: PIETRO MASCAGNI

Composer of Cavalleria Rusticana.]

[Illustration: RUGGIERO LEONCAVALLO

Composer of Pagliacci.]


REALISM IN OPERA

[Illustration: Copyright, A. Dupont.

GIACOMO PUCCINI]

Some of the first fruits of the tendency toward realism are
plays whose plots can scarcely be narrated without moral and
even physical nausea. Compared with them Mascagni’s “Cavalleria
Rusticana” (kah-vahl-lay-ree´-ah rus-tee-kah´-nah) and Leoncavallo’s
(lay-own-kah-vahl´-o) “Pagliacci” (pahl-yah´-chee) are sweet and sane.
After the taste for hot blood had been measurably satiated and the
failure of scores of operas in which lurid orchestration, violent
shriekings, and rough harmonies had supplanted the old national ideal
there came back again the reign of dramatic melody, albeit in a new
form, as we have it in the works of Mascagni, Leoncavallo, and Puccini
(poot-chee´-nee).

Puccini’s operas are not entirely purged of artistic coarseness (as
witness “Tosca” and “The Girl of the Golden West”); but he has been
true to his Italian mission as a melodist, and has besides widened the
Italian canvas to receive the new element of local color, which is an
essential element in “Madame Butterfly,” the most extraordinary feature
of which is the degree in which such stubborn material as Japanese
melody has been made to yield up a charm which it does not at all
possess in its native state.

[Illustration: GIACOMO MEYERBEER

1791-1864

Composer of Les Huguenots.]

Fifty years ago, so far as Americans were concerned, French opera
was practically summed up in “Les Huguenots” and “Faust.” Meyerbeer
(my´-er-bare) was not a Frenchman, but the embodiment of merely
sensuous tendencies which belonged no more to one people than to
another, but which found its fittest expression in the glamour of
Parisian life. That Gounod (goo-no´) should have prevailed against
these tendencies is to the great credit of the man and the people from
whose loins he was sprung.


GOUNOD’S MUSIC

[Illustration: CHARLES FRANCOIS GOUNOD

1818-1893.]

Amiability was as marked a characteristic of Gounod’s music as it was
of his personality. He was graceful and winning, but not strong. He
was an emotionalist and a mystic. When his expression of passion ran
out into ecstasy he was at his best, and he could give expression
to an emotional state better than he could depict its development.
Essentially, therefore, he was a lyrical rather than a dramatic
composer. The two most perfect products of his genius both disclose the
climax of their beauty in scenes wherein ecstatic utterance asserts its
right. The gems in Gounod’s crown are the garden scene of “Faust” and
the balcony scene of “Roméo et Juliette.” Critics have placed a high
estimate upon the latter opera, and the lovers of sentimental church
music are fond of Gounod’s religious ballads (they are nothing else),
one or two of his masses, and the oratorio “The Redemption”; but to the
historian and the people of the future it is not likely that he will be
more than the composer of “Faust,” an opera which has a history that is
unique in operatic annals. It had been in the repertory of the Théâtre
Lyrique ten years when it was transferred to the Académie Nationale (or
Grand Opera, as it is popularly called) in 1869. When the transfer was
made it had already been performed four hundred times in Paris, and
before Gounod died in 1893 it had been performed nearly seven hundred
times more. No opera has had a record comparable with this, and there
is yet no evidence of loss of popularity in France, England, or America.

[Illustration: GOUNOD’S RESIDENCE IN PARIS]

As a musician Gounod may be described as an eclectic. Though his
genius was essentially lyrical, his models were the kings of dramatic
music,--Mozart, Weber (vay´-ber) and Wagner. To his love for the first
of these he raised a lovely monument in a book on “Don Giovanni”
(jo-vahn´-nee), which opera, he said, had influenced his whole life
like a revelation, and had remained from the beginning the embodiment
of dramatic perfection. He was one of the first of Wagner’s disciples
in France; but his lyrical trend did not permit him to follow the
German poet-composer to the logical outcome of his theories. Wagner’s
influence upon him stopped with “Lohengrin.” Thereafter, as Gounod
himself expressed it, he and Wagner traveled in diametrically opposite
directions, he seeking to grow more simple in his manner and more
desirous to achieve his ends by unaffected means and truthfulness of
feeling. At the end he was disposed to consider Wagner an aberration of
genius, a visionary haunted by the colossal, unable longer to estimate
aright his own intellectual powers, one who had lost the sense of
proportion.

So far as American people are concerned the operatic Gounod lives only
in “Faust” and “Roméo et Juliette.” There have been a few fitful
performances of “Mireille” (mee-ray´) and “Philémon et Baucis”
(Anglicized: fy-lee´-mon and baw´-sis); but all the other operas on his
list are a blank.

Very different is the case of the most popular of his successors,
Massenet (mahs-nay´); though it is more than likely that he too will
become a two-opera man. Massenet is the most popular of Gounod’s
successors, but not the greatest. A greater musical dramatist than he
was Bizet (bee-zay´); a greater musician and almost also as prolific
an opera writer was, or is, Saint-Saëns (sahng-song´). These two men
are represented in current opera lists by a single opera each; but of
Massenet’s works New Yorkers have heard no less than eleven,--“Werther”
(vare-ter) and “Manon” (mah-nong´), which are likely to endure, and
“Le Cid” (lay sid), “La Navarraise,” “Le jongleur de Notre-Dame”
(translated: The juggler of no´-tr dahm), “Thaïs” (tah-ees´),
“Hérodiade,” “Sapho” (sah-fo´), “Grisélidis,” and “Cendrillon”
(sang-dri-yong´) which are not likely to endure long.

[Illustration: AMBROISE THOMAS

Composer of Mignon.]

[Illustration: CAMILLE SAINT-SAËNS

Composer of Samson and Delilah.]

[Illustration: LEO DELIBES

Composer of Lakmé.]


THE QUALITY OF MASSENET

So many operas ought to speak well of Massenet’s versatility, as it
surely does of his productiveness and industry; but the individuality
of this composer, which is incontestable, is an individuality of
style which leans heavily on sameness. The French wits who thought it
clever to dub him “Mademoiselle Wagner” twenty years ago never got
the opportunity to call him _Madame_ Wagner. He never grew up to that
estate. He did not grow older in thought or riper in creative ability;
but only more facile in expression.

[Illustration: JULES MASSENET. 1842-1913]

All of Massenet’s operas are essentially illustrative of the
sentimental spirit of French art. Whether Gounod attempts to write an
oratorio on so sublime a subject as the fall and redemption of man,
or Massenet tries to picture the touching faith and piety of an honest
mountebank, it is all one: the music is bound to run out into a strain
of religious balladry. But French music as represented by Gounod and
Massenet is ingenuous also in its persistent pursuit of beauty. The
northern ideal of strength before beauty, or truth before convention,
is not for the French, with their devotion to elegance of utterance,
and this fact has saved their lyric stage from the deplorable tendency
exhibited by the most notable, and probably greatest, German composer
since Wagner, namely, Richard Strauss (strous). Oscar Wilde, though
English, wrote his “Salomé” in French; but it had to wait for the
coming of a German for a musical glorification of its morbid attraction
toward dead bodies. Nor is Electra’s bestial ferocity, as pictured by
Hoffmansthal and Strauss, likely soon to find favor among the French.
Thus much must be said in favor of the artistic tendency of a people
who are still willing to hark back to a miracle-tale like that of “Our
Lady’s Juggler,” or to a legend like that of “The Patient Grizel,” for
operatic material.

[Illustration: MASSENET IN HIS STUDIO IN 1891]

Between Gounod and Massenet there stands at least one French dramatic
composer who accomplished much, but promised more in respect of the
development of the lyric drama. Bizet’s “Carmen” has won heartier
recognition in Germany than even Gounod’s “Faust.” Perhaps the
qualities which conquered this distinction were against it when it
first appeared in its native land. It may have been a feeling of its
approach to an extra-national ideal which made the French people, who
with all their enthusiasm for art are yet strongly predisposed in favor
of their own ideals, scent an objectionable Teutonism in “Carmen” and
give it only tardy recognition; perhaps also more than a touch of
jealous patriotism.

The Franco-Prussian War had a twofold effect upon music in France,--it
threw the people back upon an appreciation of some of their own
composers,--Berlioz (bear-lee-oze), for instance,--and also turned
them against not only the German, but also all of their own composers
in whom they thought they recognized German influences. The feeling
was not only strong to taboo Wagner, but everybody in whose music
they scented _Wagnerisme_. Their conception of the term was amusingly
vague. They did not recognize it in the freedom of form manifested in
“Faust”; but felt it in the truthful and forceful dramatic expression
which marked “Carmen,” and especially in Bizet’s use of the typical
phrase, the _Leitmotiv_. Wagnerism had to be purged by time before
Charpentier (shahr-pong-tee-ay) could triumph with “Louise,” and
Debussy (day-boos-see´) with “Pelléas et Mélisande” (pale-lay-ahs´
ay may-lee-sahnd´), works in which the Wagnerian system is much more
extensively and frankly used than in “Carmen.”

[Illustration: GEORGES BIZET--1838-1875

Composer of Carmen.]

[Illustration: GUSTAVE CHARPENTIER

Composer of Louise.]

[Illustration: CLAUDE DEBUSSY

Composer of Pelléas et Mélisande.]


THE INFLUENCE OF WAGNER

French, German, Italian, Russian, and English composers have for half a
century been under the domination of Wagner’s influence. In France and
Italy he put a new spirit into opera; but the composers did not attempt
to follow him slavishly in both practice and precept. In Germany, on
the other hand, many of his disciples made the attempt and failed. Two
only have created living works--Engelbert Humperdinck (hoom´-per-dingk)
and Richard Strauss. The more interesting phenomenon of the two is
presented by Humperdinck, who has not only applied Wagner’s theories
to the musical score of his masterpiece, “Hänsel und Gretel” (hen´-zel
oont gray´tel), but has extended their application to dramatic material.


HUMPERDINCK AND WAGNER

[Illustration: ENGELBERT HUMPERDINCK]

Wagner held myth to be the best subject for the lyric drama;
Humperdinck has extended the principle to include fairy tales, which,
in a sense, may be said to be decayed myths. Taking the German form
of the story of the Babes in the Wood, he has turned it into an opera
which illustrates the methods Wagner employed in his great mythological
tragedy, “The Nibelung’s Ring,” and has given the methods a peculiar
charm by making his musical symbols (_Leitmotiven_) out of nursery
jingles and tunes like them. Notwithstanding that he was thus hewing
to a line drawn by another, the opera has a melodic fluency and
freshness which have scarcely a parallel in modern opera. A later
work “Königskinder” (Royal Children), though full of beauty, lacks
the spontaneity and charm of its predecessor largely because its book
is stilted in language, its symbolism too much in evidence and not
sufficiently sympathetic, and its construction faulty.


RICHARD STRAUSS

[Illustration: RICHARD STRAUSS]

Richard Strauss reflects the tendency of the times away from all
ideal things. Physical, moral, and mental degeneracy are the subjects
which he has attempted to glorify in “Salomé” and “Elektra,” and
shameless immorality in “Rosenkavalier” (ro´-zen-kahv-ah-leer´). To
the celebration of such things and to the promotion of his material
interests he is prostituting the finest musical gifts possessed by any
composer known to the present day.

Not all the men who deserve to be called makers of modern opera have
been mentioned as yet. There are Frenchmen whose works have shown
more vitality than those of Charpentier and Debussy, though these two,
representing a more individual tendency, are generally singled out for
comment when the talk is of latter-day men.


OTHER MODERN COMPOSERS

There is still a strong feeling among the lovers of French opera
for Ambroise Thomas because of his “Mignon,” and Delibes because of
his “Lakmé” and his ballets. The dramatic, or pantomimic, dance is
getting a stronger hold on the stage every day, and nothing has yet
been produced in this line more graceful or in all artistic elements
more elegant than “Coppélia.” Saint-Saëns’s “Samson et Delilah,”
though better fitted for the concert-room than the theater, has also
won its way to recognition in America and England; while Germany,
forgetting that Berlioz was pitted against Wagner by the characteristic
spirit after the Franco-Prussian War, continues to pay deep respect
to “Benvenuto Cellini.” Wolf-Ferrari, half German, half Italian, has
fought his way to the fore with two works in which his genius shows
at its best (“Il Segreto di Susanna” and “Le Donne Curiose”), and
lately a Russian, Moussorgsky, has come crashing through the veneer of
conventional art with his “Boris Godounov” in a way which justifies the
cry raised long ago by this writer in the concert-room: “Beware of the
Muscovite!”

[Illustration: ERMANO WOLF-FERRARI

Composer of The Jewels of The Madonna.]


SUPPLEMENTARY READING

    CHAPTERS OF OPERA _By H. E. Krehbiel._

    A BOOK OF OPERAS _By H. E. Krehbiel._

        Mr. Krehbiel’s books are admirable commentaries, written with
        authority and in a most readable style.

    MEMOIRS OF THE OPERA _By George Hogarth._

        A standard work long recognized.

    HISTORY OF THE OPERA _By Sutherland Edwards._

        A valuable work by an English authority.

    THE LYRICAL DRAMA _By H. Sutherland Edwards._

    THE OPERA, PAST AND PRESENT _By W. F. Apthorp._

        Brilliant writing and critical taste characterize Mr. Apthorp’s
        work.

    SOME FORERUNNERS OF MODERN OPERA _By W. J. Henderson._

        A thoughtful, scholarly and well written book.

    THE STANDARD OPERA _By George P. Upton._

        An excellent book by a well known Chicago critic.




THE MENTOR

ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY BY

The Mentor Association, Inc.

381 Fourth Ave., New York, N. Y.

    Vol. 1      No. 47

    ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS.
    FOREIGN POSTAGE, SEVENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE,
    FIFTY CENTS EXTRA. ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK, N. Y.,
    AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER.


_Editorial_

The new year is here and with it the forward look. It is the time for
announcements, and the magazines of the day are filled with them. The
Mentor Association does not lay down a definite and fixed program for a
year ahead, week by week. It is important that our schedule should be
elastic. But we want our readers to know the plans of The Mentor for
1914, and so we print herewith a list containing some of the subjects
scheduled. The articles may not appear in the exact order of this list.
Definite dates will be announced later. We print the list for the
purpose of giving our readers an idea of the scope and variety of the
year’s program.

       *       *       *       *       *

    TWO EARLY GERMAN PAINTERS, DÜRER AND HOLBEIN. Portrait of
    Himself, Dürer; Portrait of Young Woman, Dürer; Hieronymus
    Holzschuher, Dürer; Erasmus, Holbein; The Meier Madonna,
    Holbein; Queen Jane Seymour, Holbein. By Professor F. J.
    Mather, Princeton University.

    VIENNA, THE QUEEN CITY. Palace from Gardens Schönbrunn, Votive
    Church, Reichsrats Gebäude, Old Vienna, Maria Theresa Monument,
    Hoch Brunnen Fountains and Prince’s Palace. By Dwight L.
    Elmendorf.

    ANCIENT ATHENS. Parthenon, The Acropolis, Mars Hill
    (Areopagus), Theseum, Stadium, Theater of Dionysius. By
    Professor George Willis Botsford, Columbia University.

    THE BARBIZON PAINTERS. Evening, by Daubigny; The Holy Family,
    Diaz; Meadow Bordered by Trees, Rousseau; Landscape with Sheep,
    Jacque; The Wild Oak, Dupré; The Gleaners, Millet. By Arthur
    Hoeber.

    ABRAHAM LINCOLN. Lincoln, the Boy, Lincoln as a Rail Splitter
    or Flatboat Man, the Douglas Debates, President Lincoln,
    Emancipation Proclamation, Assassination. By Professor Albert
    Bushnell Hart, Harvard University.

    MEXICO. Mexico City, The Cathedral, The Palace, Popocatepetl,
    Chapultepec, Scenic View. By Frederick Palmer, Author and
    Journalist.

    GEORGE WASHINGTON. The Surveyor, Braddock’s Army, Taking
    Command of American Army, Valley Forge, Farewell Address,
    Inauguration as President. By Professor Robert McNutt McElroy,
    Princeton University.

    AMERICAN PROSE WRITERS. Benjamin Franklin, Jonathan Edwards,
    Charles Brockden Brown, Washington Irving, James Fenimore
    Cooper, James Kirke Paulding. By Hamilton W. Mabie.

    COURT PAINTERS OF FRANCE. Parnassus, Claude Lorrain; The French
    Comedy, Watteau; Shepherds in Arcadia, Poussin; Louis XIV,
    Rigaud; Marie Leczinska (wife of Louis XIV), Van Loo; Music
    Lesson, Lancret. By W. A. Coffin.

    GLACIER NATIONAL PARK, MONTANA. Morning Eagle Falls, Shore
    Line of Lake St. Mary, Iceberg Lake, Two Medicine Camp on
    Two Medicine Lake, McDermott Falls, Gunsight Lake and Mount
    Jackson. By William T. Hornaday.

    GRECIAN MASTERPIECES. Venus de Milo, Disk Thrower, The Three
    Fates, From Parthenon Pediment; Samothracian Victory, Hermes,
    Pericles.

    EARLY ENGLISH POETS. Geoffrey Chaucer, Edmund Spenser, John
    Milton, John Dryden, Alexander Pope, William Cowper. By
    Hamilton W. Mabie.

    FLEMISH MASTERS OF PAINTING. Rubens and Isabella Brandt,
    Rubens; The Lion Hunt, Rubens; Helene Fourment and Daughter,
    Rubens; Duke of Buckingham with Horse, by Van Dyck; William II
    of Orange and His Bride, Van Dyck; Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
    Van Dyck. By Professor John C. Van Dyke.

    HISTORIC AMERICAN HIGHWAYS. Boone’s Wilderness Road, Cumberland
    Road, Braddock’s Road, Old Natchez Trail, Santa Fé Trail,
    Oregon Trail. By H. Addington Bruce.

Other subjects for the year are as follows:

    BERLIN. By Dwight L. Elmendorf.

    MASTERS OF THE PIANO. By Henry T. Finck.

    AMERICAN POETS OF THE SOIL. By Burges Johnson.

    FAMOUS AMERICAN WOMEN PAINTERS. By Arthur Hoeber.

    OUR FEATHERED FRIENDS. By E. H. Forbush.

    HOLLAND. By Dwight L. Elmendorf.

    THE CONQUEST OF THE AIR. By Henry Woodhouse.

    FATHERS OF THE CONSTITUTION. By Professor Albert Bushnell Hart.

    THE CELESTIAL WORLD.

    INDIA. By Dwight L. Elmendorf.

    RUGS AND RUG MAKING. By J. K. Mumford.

    FAMOUS EUROPEAN WOMEN PAINTERS.

    MASTERS OF THE VIOLIN. By W. J. Henderson.

    GREAT RIVERS. Story of the Rhine.

    GREAT PULPIT ORATORS.

    JAPAN. By Dwight L. Elmendorf.

    WOMEN OF THE FRENCH COURT.

    FOUNDERS OF ENGLISH PAINTING. By Arthur Hoeber.

    AMERICAN COLONIAL FURNITURE.

    HISTORIC AMERICAN HOMES.

    CHINA AND CHINA COLLECTING.

       *       *       *       *       *

These titles are not representative of all the departments in the
interesting course that The Mentor is developing. Had we four times the
space we could fill it with equally attractive features. What we print,
however, will afford some idea of the wealth of material that has been
planned for early publication.




[Illustration: GIUSEPPE VERDI]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Giuseppe Verdi_

ONE


The last and greatest of the old school of Italian opera composers,
and one of the most popular of all opera composers in the world, was
Giuseppe Verdi (joo-sep´-pe ver´-dee). He was born of humble parentage
in the little Italian village of Roncole on October 10, 1813. His
parents kept a tavern, which they combined with a general village
store. It was situated in a neighborhood of ignorant laborers. Little
chance was there in that spot for a budding genius in music. Verdi’s
art instinct had to feed on slim nourishment, like a stray seed blown
among rocks; but, like the stray seed, his genius took root even
in that arid soil. His love of music was shown by his following an
itinerant fiddler round the village. His father, detecting his taste,
got him a mediocre piano, on which young Verdi practised vigorously.

When ten years old he played the organ in the village church, and at
last a patron provided him with the means to go to Milan. When he
applied for admission to the conservatory he was rejected, on the score
that he had no aptitude for music. He stayed in Milan, however, as a
pupil of Vincenzo La Vigna (vin-chen´-zo la veen´-yah), with whom he
remained until 1833. He married in 1832, and in 1838 returned to Milan,
where he wrote his first opera, “Oberto.” This did not prove a success;
but it was the beginning of a famous career.

Verdi’s first success was achieved in 1843, when he brought out
“I Lombardi.” It was followed the next year by “Ernani,” and with
that work his reputation was firmly established. A number of operas
followed, some successful, others failures. But in 1851 began the
period during which “Rigoletto,” “Il Trovatore,” and “La Traviata”
appeared, and then all Europe rang with his praises.

Verdi was not only the most popular operatic composer of the nineteenth
century, but the wonder of the musical world. His art life might be
divided into three parts. His first operas were of the old-fashioned
“honey-sweet” Italian type, in which the airs were tunefully
sentimental, and the orchestra played a “guitar” accompaniment.

The middle period showed quite a definite advance in dramatic vigor,
in fullness of musical expression, and in richness of orchestral
technic. Of this period “Aïda” is a notable example. Then, in his
ripe old age, Verdi revealed an amazing growth in musical power. He
had advanced through the years as the art of operatic composition had
advanced. His opera “Otello” showed that he had studied and mastered
the newer works of his day, and that he held a leading place even
with younger composers. “Falstaff,” his last opera, was a revelation
of extraordinary fertility and virility in an artist of advanced age.
It established Verdi’s reputation for all time as a composer of music
drama as his earliest works had shown his skill in tuneful opera. The
music score of “Falstaff” is as free and untrammeled as the work of any
modern composer, even Richard Wagner himself.

Verdi lived until he was eighty-eight years old, enjoyed a happy home,
quiet pleasures, and the admiration not only of his own country but
of all the world. He died at Milan in 1901, having left twenty-nine
operas, most of which were notably successful.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: JULES E. F. MASSENET]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Jules Émile Frédéric Massenet_

TWO


Massenet, one of the most renowned French composers, was born at
Montaud, May 12, 1842. Like nearly all French musicians, he began his
study in the French Conservatory. He was so poor in his early days
that he had to help pay his living expenses by playing the kettledrum
in a café orchestra. He carried off several minor prizes during his
student days, and finally in 1863 secured the prize of Rome, and this
despite the fact that the head of the conservatory at first tried to
exclude him on the ground that he had no musical ability. On returning
from Rome in 1867 he produced his first opera, a one-act affair which
achieved only moderate success. He served in the Franco-Prussian War,
and his impressions received there found musical expression in his
study “Alsaciennes” and his one-act opera “Navarraise.” After that time
Massenet was industrious in composition, turning out operas every year
or so. The wonder of it is that most of them have been successful and
are a part of the operatic repertoire today.

From 1878 to 1896 he was a professor of composition at the Paris
conservatory, and had under his tuition a number of pupils who have
since become famous; Charpentier, the composer of “Louise,” was one of
them. His activities may be gathered from the fact that he has written
more than twenty operas and five oratorios, together with incidental
music to four dramas.

In 1878 he was elected a member of the Academy of Beaux Arts, an honor
that he won over Saint-Saëns, who is reckoned a superior musician.

He died in Paris August 13, 1912.

Massenet has been called a puzzling personality in modern musical
history. His subjects are chosen to suit a Parisian public, and yet
they have been successful in foreign fields. His style has been called
“weak and sugary,” and his music “superficially clever.” But in spite
of that Massenet’s music has lasted for years, and, however he may be
criticized, his poetic sentiment and richly colored orchestration are
emphatically suitable to the public taste.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: © AIMÉ DUPONT

GIACOMO PUCCINI]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Giacomo Puccini_

THREE


Giacomo Puccini (jah-ko´-mo poot-chee´-nee) was named by the great
Verdi as his probable successor. That meant much from the lips of the
venerable master, and the years are beginning to verify it. Puccini
was born at Lucca, Italy, in June, 1858. He came from a long line of
musicians, reaching as far back as his great-great-grandfather. In his
own immediate family of six all were devoted to music, and Giacomo
took to the art from his earliest years. He breathed it as he breathed
the air of life. His precocity attracted the attention of the queen
of Italy, who granted him a pension that enabled him to enter the
Conservatory of Music at Milan.

His mind turned toward composition from earliest years, his dominating
thought always being opera,--not old-fashioned opera of melody and
empty orchestration, but opera of the modern sort, vibrant with life,
vigorous in dramatic expression, and enriched with all the resources
of modern orchestration. Ponchielli (pon-kee-el´-lee) was his chief
instructor,--Ponchielli, the composer of “Gioconda” (jo-kon´-dah), who
has been credited with inspiring the modern Italian school of composers.

Puccini’s first opera, “Le Ville” (le veel), was produced in 1884.
It created a favorable impression--that was all. In 1889 his opera
“Edgar” appeared; but it was not popular. Four years later, however,
“Manon Lescaut” (mah-nong´ les-ko´) was produced. This established his
success. It required courage to go to the opera house with a new work
on Manon. Massenet’s “Manon” was known throughout the operatic world,
where it had been made successful by the brilliant performances of Jean
de Reszke and Sibyl Sanderson. But Puccini’s “Manon” is of stronger
stuff, and it holds its place today against the other.

It was the production of “La Bohème” (bo-hame´) in Turin in 1896 that
made Puccini famous. “Tosca” followed in 1900, and in 1904 came the
charming “Madame Butterfly.” This beautiful opera was hissed by the
Italians when it was first produced; a fact hard to understand today,
when it has become a rival of “La Bohème” in the public’s esteem.
In 1910 Puccini produced his operatic setting of the American play,
“The Girl of the Golden West.” It was brought out in New York with a
cast of great artists, including Caruso, Destinn and Amato. It has
been produced a number of times, and holds an important place in
the operatic repertoire. It is not, however, generally reckoned in
popularity with “La Bohème” and “Madame Butterfly.” These two charming
works are masterpieces of art and sentiment.

Puccini has a rare gift of melody, strong imagination, skill in
technic, and an unusual sense of orchestral color. He is considered the
most gifted of the present representatives of Italian operatic art.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: RICHARD STRAUSS]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Richard Strauss_

FOUR


No composer since Wagner’s time has been the subject of more discussion
than Richard Strauss. He has been called the champion of the “forward
movement.” Strauss came by his musical instincts naturally: he was
the son of a horn player. His birth occurred in 1864, and he showed
himself a prodigy from an early age. He played the piano proficiently
at four years, and produced a number of compositions when only six.
He followed his musical studies with avidity and at the same time was
attending public school. In 1885 he began to study music regularly
under the tuition of the eminent pianist and conductor, Hans von Bülow
(bue´-low), whom he succeeded later as head of the Meiningen orchestra.

It was Alexander Ritter that set Richard Strauss on the path of
advanced music. Strauss resigned his conductorship after a few months,
and in 1885 went to Italy. Before the year was over he was appointed
third chapel master in Munich. Four years after that he took the
position of director at Weimar. He held this post, however, for only a
brief time; for in 1894 he married Pauline de Ahna, an eminent singer,
who has accompanied him in concerts and has rendered great service to
him by her interpretations of his songs.

For two years Strauss and his wife made tours throughout Europe. They
came to the United States, where he gave concerts made up of his own
compositions. In song and in opera composition he is regarded by some
as a high priest of future art, and by others as merely a shock to the
nerves.

The productions of his new operas have usually been the occasions
of sensational interest. “Salomé” and “Elektra” both created a loud
stir in the musical world. Many resent the bold and radical spirit
of Richard Strauss. Perhaps we are all too near him. His enemies, or
rather his severest critics, would say that anywhere within hearing
of his operas would be too near. Many music students, however, find
much to interest them in his work, and declare that Richard Strauss
will come into his own in future years. His operas, for other reasons
than their music, are not likely to be set in the regular repertoire
of an opera season. His songs and tone poems, however, are already
an accepted part of concert programs. In richness of orchestration,
tremendous climaxes, vivid flashes of color, and frequent outbursts of
dramatic power, there is nothing in modern music to place beside the
tone poems of Richard Strauss.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: CHARLES FRANCOIS GOUNOD]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Charles François Gounod_

FIVE


Charles François Gounod, the best known and by many the most liked of
modern French composers, was born in Paris, June 17, 1818. His father
having died when Gounod was yet very young, he was brought up by his
mother, who was an excellent pianist. He entered the Paris Conservatory
in 1836, and studied there under masters, one of them, Halévy, composer
of “The Jewess,” a successful opera in its day. Gounod won the grand
prize of Rome in 1839. That gave him the privilege of studying in Rome,
and while there he devoted much of his time to the study of sacred
music, especially to the works of the old masters Palestrina and Bach.

Gounod had a strong religious tendency from the first, which brought
him at times near to a resolution to join holy orders. His earliest
compositions were masses, and on returning to Paris he played the organ
for sacred services in one of the leading churches. He was turned from
a serious and religious contemplation to worldly matters by receiving a
commission to compose an opera. This, his first operatic composition,
was “Sapho,” which was produced in 1851. It was not very successful,
and is seldom produced; though selections from its score are sometimes
played and sung.

After some indifferent success and several failures Gounod brought out
his opera “Faust” in 1859. In spite of the fact that he had chosen a
subject that had been drawn on liberally by other composers, “Faust”
was a success from the beginning, and it is now without doubt the most
popular French work in the operatic repertoire. It was liked at the
start; but its enormous success was not predicted then. It has grown in
the affections of the opera-going public year by year, until today it
is one of the most prominent features of an operatic season.

“Philémon et Baucis,” “The Queen of Sheba,” “Roméo et Juliette,” and
other operas followed. Of these the last named is the only one that
remains a favorite with the public. Among Gounod’s notable compositions
are two grand oratorios, “The Redemption” and “Mors et Vita” (Death and
Life), and a number of distinguished songs.

According to the celebrated composer Saint-Saëns, it is in these two
oratorios that Gounod’s genius rose highest. Gounod’s life was spent
for the most part in or near Paris, and it was in that city that most
of his great works were first produced. He was a man of great energy, a
constant worker, both in musical composition and in writing. He died at
St. Cloud, October 18, 1893, leaving an influence on French music that
will probably never be dimmed.

Personally he was one of the most interesting figures in the musical
world,--a man of the world, and at the same time a student, a dreamer,
and a mystic devoted to religious exaltations.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: ENGELBERT HUMPERDINCK]




_MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA_

_Engelbert Humperdinck_

SIX


Few composers have so suddenly sprung into fame and favor as Engelbert
Humperdinck. He was born at Sigburg, Germany, in September, 1854. His
musical education began in Cologne Conservatory under Hiller, and
was continued in Munich under Lachner. The prizes that he won at the
conservatory enabled him to go to Italy, where he met Richard Wagner at
Naples, who recognized his ability and showed him many favors. Wagner
took Humperdinck with him to Bayreuth and made an assistant of him.
Humperdinck’s services were most valuable in the production of Wagner’s
“Parsifal” in 1882. Subsequently he visited France and Spain, remaining
two years in the latter country, teaching at Barcelona.

In 1887 he returned to Cologne, and shortly afterward taught music
at Frankfort-on-the-Main. In 1896 the emperor secured for him an
appointment as professor in Berlin, and Humperdinck moved there in 1900.

The compositions of Humperdinck are not numerous. His reputation,
as far as the world at large is concerned, rests entirely on his
masterpiece, “Hänsel und Gretel.” Besides this opera, he wrote
incidental music for “The Children of the King,” a charming play of
allegorical character, and the “Moorish Rhapsody,” an orchestral piece.
These two and a few other compositions are known chiefly to music
lovers, and they uphold the reputation that Humperdinck obtained by his
“Hänsel und Gretel.”

The fairy opera, “Hänsel und Gretel,” is known the world over, and
well beloved wherever it is heard. Its success was phenomenal from
the start, the story of the opera being captivating, and the music
likewise. It came at a time when the attention of the operatic world
was absorbed with some of the successors of the well known Italian
school, prominently Mascagni and Leoncavallo. But the little opera
struck a note much higher, and so much more beautiful that before
the first season was over the Italian composers found their admirers
listening to and singing the music of “Hänsel und Gretel,” and leaving
their intermezzi to the street organs. The eminent critic, Streatfeild,
pronounced Humperdinck “the first German composer of distinct
individuality since Wagner.” The close association with Wagner that
Humperdinck enjoyed has shown its influence on the latter’s music; but
there is a spirit and a quality in it all his own.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 47
    COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: MAKERS OF MODERN OPERA, VOL. 1, NUM. 47, SERIAL NO. 47 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


