The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Illustrated Account of St. Bartholomew's Priory Church, Smithfield
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An Illustrated Account of St. Bartholomew's Priory Church, Smithfield

Author: Normanus

Illustrator: G. J. Evans

Release date: July 6, 2015 [eBook #49383]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by deaurider, Chuck Greif and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ILLUSTRATED ACCOUNT OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S PRIORY CHURCH, SMITHFIELD ***

                   PRIORY CHURCH OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW,
                              SMITHFIELD.




                        AN ILLUSTRATED ACCOUNT

                                  OF

                   St. Bartholomew’s Priory Church,

                              SMITHFIELD.

          [Illustration: SEAL REPRESENTING ORIGINAL PRIORY.]

                  WITH A SKETCH OF BARTHOLOMEW FAIR,

                      ST. BARTHOLOMEW’S HOSPITAL,

                                AND THE

                         PRIOR’S COUNTRY SEAT,

                      CANONBURY TOWER, ISLINGTON.




                   COMPILED FROM VARIOUS AUTHORITIES

                                  BY

                               NORMANUS.

                     [Illustration: PRIORY CHURCH

                                  OF

                                 SAINT

                              BARTHOLOMEW

                              SMITHFIELD.

                                FOUNDED

                              ANNO DOMINI

                                 1113.

                      ENTRANCE GATE, SMITHFIELD.]

         ILLUSTRATED BY 56 ENGRAVINGS FROM ORIGINAL SKETCHES,

                                  BY

                             G. J. EVANS.

                                LONDON:
              BEMROSE & SONS, 10, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS;
                              AND DERBY.




[Illustration: PREFACE]


The Church of St. Bartholomew the Great, Smithfield, is one whose
architectural and historical considerations will doubtless exempt it
from the destructive operation of the “Union of Benefices” Act.

The Compilers trust that the following particulars concerning this, the
oldest Church now remaining in London, will prove acceptable to
residents and others who are unacquainted with the many points of
interest attaching to the ancient structure.

A Sketch of St. Bartholomew Fair, Bartholomew’s Hospital, and also of
Canonbury Tower, all of which are intimately associated with the Priory,
have likewise been added.

The Illustrations are from original sketches made on purpose for this
work, which it is hoped may thereby be rendered more attractive.

The Compilers feel much indebted to the several Authors whose works have
been consulted in the preparation of this Volume.




[Illustration]




St. Bartholomew’s Priory Church,

SMITHFIELD.


At the commencement of the twelfth century, Rahere or Raherus, who had
been jester and minstrel to Henry the First, obtained from that monarch
permission to found a Priory. The site, also given by the king, was
without the city walls, not far from one of its gates, on a morass,
which extended some considerable distance. Stowe tells us, that in his
time, there was a great water here. The spot being intersected by many
brooks, much difficulty was experienced in forming even a foundation;
but after the expenditure of a considerable amount of time and labour
this was accomplished, and a grand building arose of which we purpose to
speak, and whose noble remains testify to its simple, solid grandeur,
and cause us to regret that so little is left to us of the original
structure.

Rahere, we are told, was a man “sprung and born from low kynage,” not
having cunning of liberal science--but that is more eminent than all
cunning--for he was rich in purity of conscience. His goodness showed
itself towards “God by devotion, towards his brethren by humility,
towards his enemies by benevolence.” And thus himself he exercised them,
patiently suffering; whose proved purity of soul, bright manners with
honest probity, expert diligence in divine service, prudent business in
temporal manifestations, in him were greatly to praise and commendable.
In feasts he was sober, and namely the follower of hospitality.
Tribulations of wretches, and necessities of the poor people opportunely
admitting; patiently supporting, competently spending. In prosperity not
yre prided; in adversity patient.

Such is a simple outline of the character of the man by a contemporary
biographer after his conversion; he having passed the flower of his
youth amidst the licentiousness of the soldiers’ camp and the feudal
castle, and joining in all the wild revelries of that time.

It is related he was wont to haunt the households of noblemen, and, when
under their observation, to spread their cushions with gapes and
flatterings detestable, anointing their eyes by this manner to draw to
him their friendship. He also frequented the King’s Palace, and by his
suavity and intelligence forced himself amongst the noiseful press of
that tumultuous court, into the presence of the king, and became his
minstrel.

At length he felt the emptiness of all these pleasures and excesses, and
their inability to supply his soul’s longings, and became “penytent of
his synnes;” “the inward seer and merciful God of all, the which out of
Mary Magdalen cast out seven fiends, the which to the fisher gave the
keys of heaven, mercifully converted this man from the error of his way,
and added to him so many gifts of virtue.” Influenced by the spirit of
his age he undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, and there, at the shrine of
the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, he, weeping his deeds, prayed to
our Lord for remission of them.

While at Rome he was seized with a grievous sickness, which brought him
to the verge of the grave. In his extremity, being full of dread on
account of his unatoned sins, he vowed that if health God would him give
that he might return to his country, he would found an hospital for the
benefit of poor men.

His prayers and repentance were heard and accepted; for not long after
the benign and merciful Lord beheld this weeping man, gave him his
health, and approved his vow. After this Rahere beheld a vision, full of
dread and sweetness. “It seemed to him that he was borne up on high of a
certain beast, having four feet and two wings, and set him in a high
place; and when he from so great a height would inflect and bow down his
eye to the lower part downward, he beheld a horrible pit, whose
beholding impressed him with great dread, for the deepness of the same
pit was deeper than any man might attain to see; he deemed himself to
slide into that cruel adowncast, and therefore he quaked, and for fear
trembled, and great cries out of his mouth proceeded. To whom appeared a
certain man, in majesty like a king of great beauty and imperial
authority, and fastened on him his eye.” “O man,” he said, “what and how
much service shouldst thou give to Him that in so great a peril hath
brought help to thee?” Anon he answered to this saint, “whatsoever might
be of heart and of might, diligently should I give in recompense to my
Deliverer.”

And then said he, “I am Bartholomew, the Apostle of Jesus Christ, and
come to succour thee in thine anguish, and to open to thee the secret
mysteries of Heaven; know me truly, by the will and commandment of the
Holy Trinity and the common favour of the celestial court and council,
to have chosen a place in the suburbs of London at Smithfield, where in
my name thou shalt found a church. The spiritual house Almighty God
shall inhabit and hallow it, and glorify it. Wherefore doubt thee
nought, only give thy diligence, and my part shall be to provide
necessaries, direct, build, and end this work.”

Rahere came to London deeply impressed with this vision, and often spoke
of the work he intended to do to the Nobles and Barons, and also to the
King, since the place where he was to erect his building was contained
within the King’s market.

The King lent a willing ear to his petition, and granted him permission
to build the Priory on the spot desired. It was on a very marshy piece
of ground, water everywhere abounding; the only land above the water dry
was deputed and ordained to be the gallows of thieves, and to the
torment of others that were condemned by judicial authority. The work
undertaken by him required a large amount of labour and perseverance,
and like all earnest men he set to work with the determination to
conquer all difficulties, and at length succeeded in raising a glorious
fane.

It is recorded, that feigning himself an idiot, he collected daily a
little band of children, lepers, and poor people, and with these efforts
gathered stones from the waste and morass around for the use of his
building, thus showing the many difficulties with which he had to
contend, both from man and the spot where his church was to be built.
Rahere feigned himself an idiot, to hide from his enemies, who were
numerous about the court, his ultimate design, and also to enlist the
sympathy of the people, for in that superstitious age it was believed
that idiots were under the care of a special providence.

Rahere at length cast aside his assumed idiotcy, and began his Apostolic
work by instructing with cunning of Truth, and saying the word of God in
divers churches, and constantly exhorting the multitude both of clerks
and laity to follow and fulfil those things which were of charity and
alms deed. He did not make these appeals in vain, and his purity was not
unknown at Court, and after patient waiting and labour, his church was
founded in March, Anno Domini 1113.

The edifice was of comely stonework tablewise, and an hospital house a
little longer off from the church, which was founded for the service of
the poor, the sick, and pregnant women, with the care of such children,
till seven years old, as lost their mother at birth. The year of its
completion differs as given by various authorities, but about 1123 is
the generally received date at which the Priory was finished. The
completion of the work under all the circumstances and difficulties,
created a great amount of wonder and admiration, mixed with
superstitious awe, its grandeur astonishing the beholders by its
contrast with the desolation that previously reigned around.

Rahere was appointed first Prior. He was Prior 22 years and 6 months,
and was succeeded by Thomas, one of the Canons of the church of St.
Osyth, who continued prelate about 30 years; in age 100 winters when he
died. We then have Gregory, Canon of St. Osyth, made Prior 1213, who a
few days after became monk at Abingdon.

Licence to elect a successor was granted by the King in 1256 on the
cession of Peter, 40 Henry III. Robert, the Sub-prior, was elected, and
the King consented Nov. 23 of that year.

Gilbert de Woledon was appointed 46th Henry III. The King gave his
consent, and restored temporalities Nov. 24.

John Baccen was elected 48th Henry III., Jan. 11, 1264.

Edward I. granted a license to elect a Prior March 11, 1295, on the
death of Brother Hugh. 11th Edward II. the King was advised of the death
of the Prior, and granted a license to elect another Nov. 4, 1317.

24th Edward III. license was obtained to elect a Prior on the death of
John de Packendon, May 25, 1352.

29th Edward III., on the cession of Edward de Braughgrg, John de
Carleton was appointed.

Thomas de Watford died June 4, 1381.

William Gidney became Prior June 10. Here were at that time 21 monks.

William Gidney died 1390, and John Renyndon, _alias_ Eyton, was elected
March 3rd.

Brother John succeeded him, 1407.

Brother Reginald was elected May 1, 1437, John in 1439, and William
Bolton in 1509, and who died April 15, 1532. He perhaps was the most
comfort-seeking of them all. We here introduce his Rebus--“He was Prior
Bolton, with his Bolt-in Tun.”

[Illustration]

Robert Fuller, Abbot of Waltham Holy Cross, the last Prior, was elected
in 1532, and held the Priory with his Abbey, as Prior commendatory. He
surrendered this house to the King October 25, 1540, 31st Henry VIII.,
and his Abbey of Waltham March 23rd of the same year.

During the life of Rahere the Priory flourished, and great gifts of
money and other offerings were made by the people, and it became
subsequently the richest of the thirty-six religious houses founded in
the Middle Ages.

Its fame was greatly increased by the miracles Rahere is said to have
worked; the two following are appended as specimens:--

“A woman whose tongue was so swollen she could not shut her mouth, was
brought to the church and offered to Rahere the Prior, who being a man
of mercy and great benignity, took compassion on her, and after having
revolved the relics that he had of the Cross, dipped them in water and
worked her tongue therewith, painting on it the token of the Cross, and
in the same hour the swelling went its way.”

The second is much more astonishing. “A child had been blind from its
birth, was brought to the solemnity of the glorious Apostle, and as he
entered the church fell down on the earth, and there awhile turned
himself now this way, now that way, and while tarrying there anon the
inward-born blindness fled away; and then he knew his parents with open
eyes, that never he saw before, and sundry things by their proper names
he called.”

These wonderful cures were celebrated by magnificent festivals, the
produce of which helped to swell the exchequer, and enabled Rahere to
extend his charitable operations.

Rahere found though his fame increased his difficulties did not
decrease; members of his own house rebelled against him, and he was
accused of being a deceiver. At length his position became so trying
that he appealed to the King for protection; the King listened to his
appeals, and prohibited by his royal authority, “whether his minister or
any other in his whole land, to be troublesome to Rahere the Prior, or
the aforesaid church, concerning anything that belongs thereto; and that
no man of the clergy or laity presume to usurp dominion of that place,
or introduce himself without the consent of the Prior or brethren.”

In his difficulties he was much helped and encouraged by the counsel of
an old man named Alfun, who not long before had built the adjoining
church of St. Giles, Cripplegate, also just without the city walls, the
most perfect remains of which are still to be seen in the churchyard.

[Illustration]

Having obtained these concessions from the King he purposed going to
Rome to lay before the authorities there his calamities, but death
intervened, after a prelacy of 22 years and 6 months. And thus ended the
life of this man, “subject to the King of bliss, with all meekness;
provided with all diligence that were necessary to his subjects; and so
providing increased daily to himself; before God and man grace; to the
place reverence; to his friends gladness; to his enemies pain; to his
after-comers joy.”

At the time of Rahere’s death there were 13 Canons, “with little land
and right few rents.” “When the day of his nativity into heaven was
known, it was solemnized with great joy and dancing on earth;” and
though the solemnities of miracles ceased, and less means flowed into
the church in consequence, yet “by copious oblations of the altar, and
by helping of the populous city,” it seems to have prospered very well
till it was dissolved by Henry VIII., in 1542, having enjoyed its
privileges 427 years. At its dissolution the six bells were taken out of
the church and sold to the parish of St. Sepulchre.

During the reign of Mary an attempt was made to revive the Catholic
worship here by presenting the Church to the Black Friars; but in the
first year of Elizabeth’s reign they were expelled, and the reformed
service performed, which has continued to this day.

The present church was originally the choir of the priory; it in all
probability extended to the gate in Smithfield, which was the entrance
into the southern aisle of the nave.

[Illustration]

The exterior of the church, as we now see it, consists of a brick tower,
75 feet high, erected in 1628; by its side, where the nave has been cut
away, a wall and large window have been built.

The foundations of the nave are still below the soil of the churchyard,
and near the wall on the right some fragments of columns may be seen.

There is a curious custom still observed on Good Friday; the
churchwardens proceed to a certain grave, on the stone of which are
placed 21 sixpences; 21 poor, aged people have to stoop and take them
off the stone; some are so old and decrepit as scarcely to be able to do
so; the minister is also paid the like number of sixpences.

[Illustration: VIEW OF INTERIOR, LOOKING EAST.]

We will now enter the Church. Over the space before reaching the Choir
the Tower originally stood; it was supported on four arches, which still
remain. Passing on, we come to the Choir; how striking is the solid
grandeur of the massive Norman columns, more than seven hundred years
old, and seemingly built to stand for ever. These support the fine
semi-circular arches of the edifice. An open triforium interposes, as
usual, between them and the roof, thus leaving the rafters exposed to
view, which is not to be seen in any other London church. The strong
timber roof is similar to that in Peterborough Cathedral.

[Illustration: VIEW OF INTERIOR, LOOKING WEST.]

At the north-east angle of the Choir is the beautiful Tomb of the
venerable Founder and first Prior of the Monastery. This monument,
supposed to have been erected at the beginning of the fourteenth
century, was restored by Prior Bolton. Its preservation is still ensured
by a legacy bequeathed for the purpose of keeping it in constant repair.

[Illustration]

The effigy of Rahere is doubtless a likeness; he is habited in black
robes; two Canons kneel at his feet, reading from a Bible open at the
51st chapter of Isaiah, with the following words:--“The Lord shall
comfort Zion; He will comfort all her waste places; and He will make her
wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy
and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of
melody.”

Below him on the front of the monument are four splendid coats of arms,
sculptured and painted; and above him a rich canopy with ogee arches.
The tomb is altogether a handsome and interesting work.

On the opposite side of the Choir, directly facing Rahere’s Tomb, and on
a level with the triforium, is a beautiful oriel window erected by Prior
Bolton; it communicated with his house at the east end of the church. He
could see therefrom whether the Canons were properly performing their
duties; the centre spandril contains his rebus, the Bolt and Tun.

[Illustration]

There are some other interesting monuments in the Choir; one to Robert
Chamberlain, in dark brown or black marble, it represents a man in
armour kneeling under a canopy and two angels drawing aside a curtain.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Very near this is the Monument of James Rivers, with the following
inscription:--

    “Within this hollow vault there rests the frame
     Of the high soul which once informed the same;
     Torn from the service of the state in ’s prime
     By a disease malignant at the time.

     Whose life and death designed no other end
     Than to serve God, his country, and his friend;
     Who when ambition, tyranny, and pride
     Conquer’d the age, conquer’d himself and died.”

Beyond this, in the South Aisle, is a magnificent and elaborate one of
coloured marbles and giltwork, to the memory of Walter Mildmay, founder
of Emmanuel College, Cambridge; he held office under Henry VIII., Edward
VI., was Chancellor of the Exchequer to Queen Elizabeth, and with Lord
Burleigh was deputed to treat with Mary Queen of Scots, and to deliver
to her a letter from Elizabeth at Fotheringay Castle, charging her with
treason and conspiracy.

[Illustration]

There is a curious one to the Smallpage family, containing two heads,
the one a male, the other a female in ruffs, of the period 1558, this in
dark marble.

[Illustration]

Another to Edward Cooke, with the following lines:--

    “Unsluice your briny flood; what! can you keep
     Your eyes from tears, and see the marble weep?
     Burst out for shame, or, if you find no vent
     For tears, yet stay, and see the stones relent.”

[Illustration]

There is also a Monument to the memory of Eliza Freshwater, in dark
marble; it represents a woman kneeling in prayer at an altar in a niche.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE FONT.]

In the South Aisle, at the west end, the Font stands, with a curious
cover, and two ornamental weights on chains for raising it. Hogarth was
christened at this Font.

The Aisles are about 12 feet wide, having arched or vaulted roofs; on
one side are pilasters, with the arches springing from them and joining
the massive Norman pillars of the Choir. The Aisles are lighted by
windows of different sizes and slightly pointed. At the west end of the
North Aisle may be seen a cluster of columns, of which a view is given
above.

[Illustration]

Behind the Altar is a curious stone coffin, so shaped at one end as to
fit the head of its occupant; and no doubt in its cold embrace some
ancient Brother of the Priory was once clasped.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE AMBULATORY.]

The “Ambulatory” is somewhat gloomy, but very picturesque with its
Rembrandt effect; we here introduce a view of the spot. It has long
been called the Purgatory, from being used as a charnel or bone house.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the east end of the South Aisle is a doorway that led to Bolton’s
House, in the upper right hand corner of which we again meet with
Bolton’s Rebus.

[Illustration]

The house is now used as a fringe manufactory; the upper rooms were the
dormitory and infirmary of the Monastery; the following view shows part
of the exterior where it joins the Church.

[Illustration]

Near one of the doors is a massive staircase with handrail of oak,
undoubtedly part of the original structure, but most of the interior has
been modernized, leaving few of its ancient features.

[Illustration]

The North Aisle presents several admirable views which form most
pleasing pictures.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Having taken a general survey of the interior, we will now examine some
external objects of interest.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO CLOTH FAIR FROM LONG LANE.]

Passing into Cloth Fair we find some old houses, probably in existence
when the martyrdoms took place; we here present a group of these
buildings, seen on the right soon after entering that locality.

[Illustration]

Having passed this group, and turning by the blacksmith’s, we obtain a
glimpse of the exterior of the church, with some very picturesque,
antique houses; forming together a quaint bit of Old London, worth a
journey to see.

[Illustration]

Going through the narrow passage under the houses we come to a portion
of the building now used as the boys’ school.

[Illustration]

The neighbourhood of Cloth Fair abounds with old houses; thither the
clothiers and drapers of London repaired, and had their booths and
standings within the churchyard of this Priory, closed in with walls and
gates, locked every night and watched, for safety of men’s “goods and
wares;” but Stowe says that in place of booths within the churchyard,
only let out in the fair time, and closed all the year after, are many
large houses built.

[Illustration]

Rahere’s establishment was originally of considerable extent; it
included the Close of St. Bartholomew, le Fermery, le Dorter, le Feuter,
les Cloysters, les Galleries, le Hall, le Kitchen, le Buttery, le
Pantry, le Olde Kitchen, le Woodhouse, le Garner, and le Prior’s Stable,
the Prior’s House and Mulberry Garden. It was entirely enclosed with
walls; the North Wall ran from Smithfield, along the south side of Long
Lane to the East Wall near Aldersgate Street; and the West Wall from the
south-west corner of Long Lane, along Smithfield to the Gate House, now
the principal entrance to Bartholomew Close. The South Wall commenced at
this Gate, ran east to Aldersgate Street, forming an angle, and joined
the corner of the Eastern Wall, which ran parallel with Aldersgate
Street.

How little of the original building now remains. At the time of its
suppression by Henry VIII. it was nearly demolished for the value of the
materials. Fortunately Rahere did not see its destruction, or even
imagine that the Faith he had laboured so hard to spread would one day
be superseded by a pure one; and all the pomp and ceremony of his ritual
by a simple, reformed service.

For we are told that the Prior, with his officers and satellites waving
censers, cross, relique, and banners, issued forth from the gate to
offer the hospitality of his poor house to the King and his nobles when
they attended the jousts and tournaments, so frequently held in the open
space of Smithfield.

In Edward III.’s reign there was a tournament which lasted several
days, and the King with his mistress, Alice Piers, was present.

In 1396, Richard II. on his marriage held a tournament, when sixty
knights, accompanied by ladies, were to tilt for two days at Michaelmas.
Heralds were sent through England, Scotland, France, Hainault, Germany,
and Flanders. It began at three o’clock on Sunday after Michaelmas Day;
sixty horses, richly caparisoned and surmounted by an Esquire of honour,
proceeded in great state from the Tower; sixty ladies of rank, richly
dressed, followed on their palfreys, and leading by a silver chain a
Knight completely armed for tilting; minstrels and trumpets accompanied
them. The Queen and her fair train received them. They tilted at each
other till dark, then partook of a sumptuous banquet; and dancing was
kept up till they were all fatigued. During the next two days the
warlike sport was continued; the nights being spent in the same manner
as before. The pomp and state must have been of the most magnificent
description. All this took place just outside the Priory, on the spot
that Rahere had been at so much trouble to level and fill up when Henry
I. gave it him, and which was afterwards called “Smoothfield,” from his
success in levelling it, and subsequently “Smithfield,” from the smith’s
furnace used here.

We now introduce one of the celebrated executions that took place in
Edward I. reign. Wallace was betrayed and arrested, brought to London,
dragged in chains to Smithfield, hung on the gallows (which stood under
the elms on the spot now called Cow Lane), taken down before he was
dead, disembowelled, his head struck off by the executioner, and his
body quartered and distributed over the kingdom. This happened in 1305.

We pass on to a scene enacted after the Reformation, in Queen Mary’s
reign. An attempt was made to restore the Catholic religion here, by
presenting the church to the Black Friars. When the great bell of St.
Bartholomew’s tolled the crowd separated, the military cleared the way,
and the sheriff, riding up to the gate of the Priory, claimed the bodies
of those condemned in the Chapter-house; the spiritual delivering them
to the sheriff, the representative of the temporal power, who delivered
them to the executioner, when they were bound to that cursed post cased
with iron to be devoured in the ruthless flames. The spot is now marked
by a memorial nearly opposite the gateway which forms the entrance to
the Church, and which still retains much of the ancient beauty of its
arch; a representation of which forms the title page of this book.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: H.FORT.DEL.]

It appears that an Organ was set up here by the celebrated Richard
Bridge, builder of those at St. Ann’s, Limehouse (destroyed by fire,
1850), St. George-in-the-East, St. Leonard, Shoreditch, St. Luke’s, Old
St. Christ Church, Spital Fields, &c.

In Hopkins’ and Rimbault’s Organ Book is the following extract from the
“_Daily Advertiser_” of October 27th, 1731:--“We hear that the curious
new Organ, made by Mr. Bridge for the Church of St. Bartholomew the
Great, is to be opened on Sunday next with an Anthem.”

When the Church was about to be restored, in 1868, this instrument was
removed, and is said to have been “warehoused for preservation, but
ultimately lost.”

The above engraving of it, from an original sketch made many years ago,
and believed to be the only one extant, will perhaps prove the more
interesting now that the fine old work of art can be no longer seen and
heard in the venerable place for which it was built. It is to be hoped
that the wooden erection at the entrance to the Choir may soon give
place to a screen, surmounted by an organ, after the manner of that at
St. Lawrence, Guildhall. Its case might present three fronts of pipes, a
very fine example of which (probably the only one in or near London)
exists at the Church of St. James the Great, Bethnal Green.




Particulars of Seals.


The earliest Seals preserved are attached to a life grant to the Church
of St. Sepulchre, from Rahere to Haynon a Priest, upon the condition of
certain payments for the benefit of the canons and poor persons living
in the Hospital; date 1137.

[Illustration]

This Seal was cast eleven years after Rahere became Prior, and is a
representation of him in his canonical dress.

Appended to a deed relating to the lease of a shop in the Parish of St.
Nicholas, granted by Hugo Capellamus et Prixta and three others of the
Brethren of the Hospital, to Hugo de Lecton, at a rental of 8d. per
annum, payable quarterly, A.D. 1164.

[Illustration]

Common Seal and Counter Seal, cast 1263; appended to a deed.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Hospital Seal appended to lease of a shop without Barbican; the lease is
granted by William le Rous, Master of the Hospital, to John de Harewood
and his sons, for the yearly rental of 3s. 4d., sterling money.

[Illustration]

Hospital receipt seal. 20 Henry VIII.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The Common Seal of the Priory on a deed, 1341, between William de Stowe,
priest of St. Edmund’s, and the Master and Brethren of the Hospital,
relating to the gift of a certain messuage and shops in the parish of
St. Sepulchre, without Newgate; the proceeds of which were to be
applied to the remuneration of two chaplains of the Priory of St.
Bartholomew, for chanting daily mass for his soul and the souls of his
beloved parents.

Conventual Seal, used by the Friars Preachers at their restoration; the
last Seal used by the Priory.




[Illustration: BARTHOLOMEW

FAIR. 1113 TO 1855.]


We now record another privilege granted by the King to Rahere; viz.,
that of holding a Fair in Smithfield. Henry II. confirmed the Charter.
It was originally instituted for the benefit of trade; the communication
with distant parts being very difficult, from the badness of the roads
and imperfect means of locomotion, and carriage of goods in the early
ages; here the different dealers brought their wares and sold them,
hence trade was benefited and also the Priory. The Fair commenced on St.
Bartholomew’s Day, and originally lasted six weeks; but was latterly
curtailed to three days. When Henry VIII. suppressed monasteries, he
made a grant, dated 1554, to Sir Richard Rich, Chancellor to the Court
of Augmentations. The annexed Fair was in this grant particularly
mentioned to be held as when in possession of the Prior and Convent.
Though originally instituted for the benefit of trade, it soon became
the theatre of public diversion. It was so celebrated in Queen
Elizabeth’s day, that Ben Jonson wrote a Play of that name. The first
dramatic performances which took place in the Fair were probably
instituted by the Priory, and consisted of representations of the
Legends of Saints, especially those connected with the Church of St.
Bartholomew; also Miracle Plays, the characters sustained by the Monks.
In 1715, and for many years afterwards, the Fair was frequented by
Actors of eminence. Dogget, so well-known for establishing the match for
the Coat and Badge, and the celebrated Sheeter, had booths in the Fair.

In 1729 the Beggars Opera was performed here.

Fielding, the celebrated novelist, had a booth here many years, and
depended upon it greatly for his livelihood; authorship being very ill
paid and precarious in his time. Mrs. Pritchard, who performed Lady
Macbeth to Garrick’s Macbeth acted in his booth.

The great Edmund Kean, and many other actors, also performed in the
booths.

A curious custom prevailed, which was a greater nuisance than the Fair
itself; at 12 o’clock at night of September 2nd, the day previous, a
riotous mob assembled and carried a woman in procession as a
representation of Lady Holland; they were called her mob, and the Fair
was then proclaimed amidst the most hideous noise and tumultuous uproar.

The following day at noon the Lord Mayor, in his state coach, attended
by his Sheriffs, City Marshals, &c., proceeded to Smithfield to proclaim
the Fair. His lordship stopped at Newgate, where he was presented with a
cool tankard by the keepers. He then proceeded along Giltspur Street to
Cloth Fair. On his approach, musical instruments, consisting of drums,
fiddles, cracked trumpets, broken bassoons, &c., were in readiness to
salute his lordship with a grand concert. He was met by a motley group,
consisting of Devils, Emperors, Kings, Harlequins, Clowns, Punch, &c.,
all splendidly arrayed. Upon reaching Cloth Fair, the Lord Mayor went
through a house at the corner under the archway. Here the proclamation
was made--whether there should be interludes or not. If the former, he
was honoured with a burst of applause from the people at every booth;
the concert was renewed, accompanied by the roaring of tigers, growls of
bears, and the thrilling shrieks of hyenas. If, on the contrary, the
Mayor interdicted shows, a sullen silence reigned for a few moments,
when the indignation of the multitude was expressed by hisses, the most
horrid yells, and sometimes personal indignities were offered to the
Mayor. On such occasions great mischief has occurred. The Fair occupied
the whole space of ground extending from the walls of the Hospital to,
and covering, the site of the present Meat Market. Smithfield was
formerly lined with pens, in which the live cattle were placed previous
to their being sold. Here were erected the show booths, the most
conspicuous of late years being that of Richardson’s; puppet shows,
dancing bears, &c., were in abundance; the effect was greatly
heightened by the noise of discordant bands of music, and cries of “Show
them in,” “Just going to begin,” &c.

At last the Fair became such an intolerable nuisance that it was
suppressed by Act of Parliament in Queen Victoria’s reign.

It consisted latterly merely of gingerbread stalls; and the proclamation
of it since 1840 was made without the Mayor’s coach. In 1850, Alderman
Musgrave, then Mayor, walked there with his attendants, and found no
fair to proclaim. After that no Mayor attended to read the proclamation,
which was written on a parchment scroll, but it was read by some
gentlemen deputed for the purpose.

Five years afterwards this form was dispensed with, and Bartholomew Fair
was proclaimed for the last time in 1855, after an existence of 742
years.




[Illustration: BARTHOLOMEW’S HOSPITAL

ARMS OF HOSPITAL AND RAHERE.]


No record of the grant of the site nor the deed of endowment is
preserved. But a charter of Henry I., dated 1133, is extant, granting
Rahere power to found an Hospital with a Monastery; eight brethren and
four sisters who were to have the care of such sick people and pregnant
women as might need the benefit of the Institution.

Alfun, who built the Church of St. Giles, Cripplegate, was the first
hospitaller; he used daily to beg for the relief of the poor in
Smithfield.

The Hospital remained attached to the Priory until its dissolution. Four
centuries after the foundation of the Hospital, the Mayors, Aldermen,
and Commonalty of the City of London prayed the King to commit the
government of the Hospital to their hands; the Hospital was transferred
to them, 1547, and the King endowed it with 500 marks, upon condition
that the citizens of London should contribute an equal sum.

The endowment was enlarged by Edward VI.; the charges of the Hospital
for one year in his reign amounted to £855. The number of persons
relieved by the Hospital at that time is not known, but it appears that
900 persons were assisted by it in the five following years after the
renewal of the foundation. About 1660 the Hospital relieved annually 300
diseased persons, at an expense of £2,000. In 1729, the expense was;
£10,245, and the patients 5,028. At present, not much less than 100,000
cases annually receive the best professional care and attendance; it is
open day and night to receive accidents or other special cases. The
number who can be accommodated within its walls at one time is nearly
500.

The government of the Hospital is vested in a President, Treasurer, &c.;
the Treasurer has a house within the Hospital. Connected with the
Hospital are three Physicians, and an Assistant Physician, and as many
Masters and Assistant Surgeons, an Apothecary, besides dressers and
subordinate officers. There is also an Hospitaller or Vicar of St.
Bartholomew the Less.

The Hospital escaped the fire of 1666, but having become ruinous by age,
in 1729 the greater part was pulled down.

The rebuilding was commenced in the following year, but not completed
till 1770. It is on the south side of Smithfield; the principal entrance
being under an arch, erected 1702, over which is a statue of Henry
VIII., with two figures representing Lameness and Disease. The main
building or quadrangle is three stories high; on the first floor of the
north wing is the grand hall, 90 feet by 35 feet and 30 feet high--it is
used for court meetings, &c. The grand staircase was painted
gratuitously by Hogarth; the subjects being the Good Samaritan, the Pool
of Bethesda, Rahere laying the foundation, and a sick man carried on a
litter attended by monks. At the back of the west wing are the Lecture
Room, Medical Theatre, Anatomical Museum, Dissecting Rooms, &c. The
Library is considered superior to that of any other Hospital as a
Medical Library, and contains some thousands of books.

[Illustration]

The Church of St. Bartholomew the Less is within the walls of the
Hospital, is octagonal in shape, with painted glass windows, is well
heated with hot air, and is reckoned one of the handsomest chapels in
London.

The Hospital is the oldest and richest of all our charitable
institutions in London.

Many celebrated surgeons have been connected with the hospital; foremost
among them being perhaps, William Harvey, born at Folkestone, April 1st,
1578, elected Fellow of the College of Physicians 1607, and who
discovered the circulation of the blood; and Dr. Abernethy, born in
1765. Many anecdotes are told of Abernethy’s rough, brusque manner while
speaking to his patients.

On one occasion he had shown a Royal Duke over the hospital, and upon
the Duke desiring to inspect the dissecting room, the key of which
Abernethy held in his hand, the latter told the Duke there were only two
classes of persons admitted, the students and the dead subject, and he
not belonging to either denomination, could not have the rules infringed
for him.[A]

 [A] This anecdote was related to the writer by an old pupil of his in
 the dissecting room of the Hospital.

Upon another occasion the Duke of York sent for him; while waiting for
the Duke, he put his hands into his pockets and began to whistle; at
length the Duke appeared, and feeling his dignity hurt by that style of
conduct, asked Abernethy if he knew who he was; he replied, “Yes, and
what of that?” and after enquiring the nature of the Duke’s ailments,
told him he should treat them as the Duke of Wellington did: storm the
out-works, and then he would get into the citadel. He died in 1831.




[Illustration: CANONBURY]


There is reason to believe that the manor of Canonbury formed one of the
lay possessions described in Domesday Book at the time of the Norman
Conquest. It came afterwards into the family of Berners, and forming
part of their fee, it was as such included in the grant made to the
Priory of St. Bartholomew, Smithfield, by Ralph de Berners, of lands and
rents, with their appurtenances in Iseldon, held of the said fee, and
enumerated among several other possessions of that monastery in a
confirmation grant of King Henry III., by letters patent bearing date at
Winchester, June 15th, 1253, in the 37th year of his reign. It is most
probable that this site being pitched upon for a mansion for the Prior
of the Canons of St. Bartholomew, received the name of Canonbury, as
Canons, in Little Stanmore, had its name from belonging to the Canons of
Bentley adjoining, which was a foundation previous to St. Bartholomew.
Bury is synonymous with Bown or Burgh, and signifies generally a mansion
or dwelling-place. The original mansion of Canonbury appears to have
been built in 1362, ten years after the Priory of St. Bartholomew had
been exempted from the payment of tenths and fifteenths, and every other
subsidy, on account of the disproportion of their income to their great
expenditure in works of charity.

Stowe informs us that Bolton, Prior from 1509 till his death, April
15th, 1532, “builded of new the Manor of Canonbury, which belonged to
the Canons of that house.”

Canonbury was most pleasantly and conveniently situated. We can imagine
the beautiful view they had from thence, standing, as it did, in the
midst of the country, and surrounded by trees and orchards; in the far
distance, in one direction, the silver Thames might be traced for miles;
on the other, the old city lying quietly in its picturesque antiquity,
and the tower of the Priory Church seen in advance of St. Paul’s, the
intervening space not covered as now by buildings, and the atmosphere
darkened by dense clouds of smoke.

At the general dissolution of Abbeys and religious houses under Henry
VIII., the Priory of St. Bartholomew, with the Manor of Canonbury, was
surrendered to the King, Oct. 25, 1539.

The Manor was, in 1539, bestowed on Thomas, Lord Cromwell, Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, the chief instrument in dissolving the
Monasteries and depressing the Clergy, Jan. 6th, 1539-40. Cromwell was
created Earl of Essex, April 17th, 1540; committed to the Tower, July
9th; accused of high treason and heresy, July 19th; and beheaded, July
28th, when Canonbury reverted to the Crown. It was granted by Edward
VI., 1547, in exchange for the site of the Priory of Tamworth, and in
consideration of the sum of £1252 6s. 3d., to John Dudley of Warwick.
This nobleman mortgaged it in 1549 to John Yorke, Esq., Citizen and
Merchant Tailor of London, for £1660, but redeemed it in a very short
time, and by deed of conveyance, dated July 18th, 4th of Edward VI.,
conveyed it back to the King, who after keeping it two years, restored
it by a fresh grant to John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland; who in a few
months was attainted and beheaded, August 22nd, 1553, under Queen Mary,
who then granted it in 1557 to Thomas Lord Wentworth; who alienated it
in 1570 to John, afterwards John Spenser, Knight and Baronet of
Walsingfield, Suffolk, from his great wealth called rich Spenser; of
whom is related the following anecdote:--In Queen Elizabeth’s time a
pirate of Dunkirk laid a plot with twelve of his mates to carry off Sir
John Spenser, which, if he had done, £50,000 had not redeemed him. He
came over the seas in a shallop, with twelve musketeers, and in the
night arrived at Barking Creek, leaving the shallop in custody of six of
his men; with the other six he came as far as Islington, and there hid
themselves in ditches near the path along which Sir John always came to
his house; but by the providence of God, Sir John, upon some
extraordinary occasion, was forced to stay in London that night,
otherwise they had taken him away; and they, fearing they should be
discovered, in the night-time returned to their shallop, and so came
safe to Dunkirk again. He died at an advanced age, March 30th, 1609, and
was buried at St. Helen’s, Bishopgate.

Sir John had by his Lady, Alice Broomhall, one sole daughter and
heiress, Elizabeth; according to tradition, carried off from Canonbury
House in a baker’s basket, by contrivance of William second Lord
Compton, Lord President of Wales, to whom, in 1594, she was married.

Lord Compton met with a very singular death; after he had waited on the
King at supper, and had also supped, he took a boat to wash himself in
the Thames; as soon as he was up to his knees in the water, he was
attacked with the colic, and cried out, “Have me into the boat again, or
I am a dead man,” and died a few hours afterwards, June 24, 1630. He was
created Earl of Northampton twelve years before his death.

Canonbury Tower has still a very quaint appearance; its walls are in
some parts covered with ivy, and in the garden at the back may still be
seen some mulberry trees, probably planted by Bolton, or, at all events,
produced from the trees he planted. Undoubtedly he passed many pleasant
hours in these grounds. From a fish-pond, formerly in these premises,
well stocked with the finny tribe, was the supply drawn to furnish the
good Prior’s table on Fridays, when he fasted, or on other days when
forbidden to eat meat. The edifice, with its domestic offices, spacious
garden grounds and park, covered nearly the whole site of what is now
called Canonbury Place.

[Illustration: GARDEN VIEW OF CANONBURY.]

One large house, having a tower of brick 17 feet square and 60 feet
high, which still retains much of its original character, is the most
striking remains; Prior Bolton is supposed to have erected this
portion.

[Illustration: FRONT VIEW.]

The two principal rooms are situate on the first and second storeys,
facing Canonbury Lane; are each 20 feet square and 12 feet high,
handsomely fitted with a wainscot of oak from floor to ceiling in a
complete state of preservation, which appears to have been done by Sir
John Spenser during his residence at Canonbury.

We now give a view of the room occupied by Oliver Goldsmith, and in
which he is supposed to have written his “Vicar of Wakefield;” it is
situated on the first floor.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF ROOM ON FIRST FLOOR.]

A view of the interior of the room on the second floor is given on the
next page.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF ROOM ON SECOND FLOOR.]

[Illustration: OAK STAIRCASE.]

The previous engraving represents a portion of the original staircase of
oak, at the upper part of the Tower.

Since the Reformation many illustrious persons have resided at
Canonbury.

In 1582, Sir Arthur Atye, Public Orator of Oxford University.

Thomas Egerton, Baron of Ellesmere, signed the Charter of Incorporation
to the Butchers’ Company when Lord Chancellor, and while on a visit to
Sir John Spenser in 1605.

The Compton family resided here. A daughter of Lord Compton was born
here in 1605.

Lord Keeper Coventry rented the place from 1627 to 1635.

The Earl of Derby dated a letter from Canonbury Park, January 29, 1635,
“where he was staid from St. James’ by the greatest snow he ever saw in
England.”

William Fielding, Earl of Denbigh, died here in 1685.

Several literary characters have lodged here.

Samuel Humphries died here, January 11, 1737.

Ephraim Chambers, Author of “Cyclopædia,” died here while engaged on
that work in 1740.

John Newbury, author of several books for children; and here, Dr. Oliver
Goldsmith, under pressing pecuniary circumstances, is said to have
written the “Vicar of Wakefield;” the good-natured bookseller, Newbury,
then renting the house, and employing Goldsmith to write for him and
giving him shelter. Before residing in the Tower, Goldsmith lived near
here, in the house of Mrs. Elizabeth Fleming, 1762. The sum stipulated
to be paid was £50 a year; Newbury, being cash-bearer to the Poet, paid
his rent quarterly, taking credit for such payment in the settlement of
their account.

Goldsmith was particularly fond of Islington, it was his custom to enjoy
what he termed his shoemakers’ holiday, which was a day of great
festivity with the Poet. Three or four of his intimate friends met at
his lodgings in the Tower to breakfast; about ten or eleven o’clock they
proceeded by the City Road and through the fields to Highbury Barn to
dinner; about six o’clock they adjourned to White Conduit House to tea;
and concluded by supping at the “Grecian” or “Temple” Coffee Houses, or
at the “Globe” in Fleet Street.

By the marriage of Lord Compton (afterwards Earl of Northampton) the
Canonbury estate was carried into his family, and the Earl of
Northampton is its present proprietor.

[Illustration: FINIS.]

BEMROSE AND SONS, PRINTERS, LONDON AND DERBY.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ILLUSTRATED ACCOUNT OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S PRIORY CHURCH, SMITHFIELD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


