The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mentor: Historic Spots of America, Vol. 1, Num. 32, Serial No. 32
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mentor: Historic Spots of America, Vol. 1, Num. 32, Serial No. 32

Author: Robert McNutt McElroy

Release date: September 7, 2015 [eBook #49905]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA, VOL. 1, NUM. 32, SERIAL NO. 32 ***

The Mentor, No. 32, Historic Spots of America




THE MENTOR

“A Wise and Faithful Guide and Friend”

    VOL. 1      NO. 32




HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA

    JAMESTOWN

    PLYMOUTH ROCK

    TICONDEROGA

    INDEPENDENCE HALL

    THE ALAMO

    GETTYSBURG

[Illustration]

_By ROBERT McNUTT McELROY_

_Head of the Department of History and Politics, Princeton University_


A few years before the settlement of the territory now known as the
United States the people of Europe had witnessed a great naval battle
in which two kinds of civilizations contended for supremacy. England
and Spain were the combatants, and the issue, as we now clearly see,
was whether the old idea of monarchy or the new idea of democracy
should dominate two continents. Gold from Mexico and Peru had made
Spain a great power. Successive royal inheritances had given to her
kingly line the control of a large part of Europe. She was the champion
of the Church of Rome, and regarded it as her mission to prevent all
heretics from planting colonies in the New World. England, on the
other hand, was the champion of Protestantism, whose doctrine of the
direct responsibility of the individual led logically to democracy in
government. England won the battle, destroying Spain’s great Armada,
and thus opening the New World to the settlement of men professing
Protestant doctrines; for as soon as Spain’s power on the seas was
shattered Protestants could plant colonies without danger of having
them destroyed by a Spanish man-of-war.

[Illustration: JAMESTOWN ISLAND

_The exact site of the original settlement. Once a peninsula, this
ground has been cut away from the mainland by the constant washing of
the river. It is now protected by a stone wall._]


THE VIRGINIA COMPANY

[Illustration: OLD CHURCH AT JAMESTOWN

_A ruined tower of the earliest colonial days._]

[Illustration: JAMESTOWN CHURCH

_A reproduction of the church built 1639-1647. This building was put up
for the Jamestown Exposition in 1907, using the old tower, which can be
seen in the background, for its entrance._]

Within a few years after the destruction of the Armada a great
colonizing company was established in England for the purpose of
sending out men to settle the New World. Sir Thomas Gates, Sir
George Somers, and a number of associates asked King James the First
of England to grant them a charter of incorporation. He consented,
and on April 10, 1606, transferred to them the vast district called
Virginia, which comprised practically all the territory later
occupied by the thirteen American colonies. The charter which made
the grant clearly declared “that all and every the Persons … which
shall dwell and inhabit within every or any of the said colonies or
Plantations, and every of their children, … shall have and enjoy all
liberties, Franchises, and Immunities … as if they had been abiding
and born within this our Realm of England.” This was a promise of
self-government for all English colonies in America, and if England
had carried it out in good faith there would not later have been the
necessity of fighting the Revolutionary War; since all that the
Americans demanded at the opening of that conflict was to be taxed only
by their own representatives, a privilege which Englishmen in England
had enjoyed for many generations.

[Illustration: JAMESTOWN MONUMENT

_A shaft to commemorate the first permanent English settlement on
American soil. Jamestown was founded May 13, 1607._]

The Virginia Company, as this great corporation was called, was divided
into two subcompanies, the London and the Plymouth Companies, to each
of which was assigned the task of colonizing one-half the territory.

Before many weeks had passed George Popham attempted to plant a colony
in the part assigned to the Plymouth Company, but it utterly failed.

The London Company, meanwhile, had fitted up three small vessels, the
Godspeed, the Discovery, and the Susan Constant, placed one hundred
and five colonists aboard, and sent them forth to plant a colony. They
sailed from the Downs on New Year’s Day, 1607, and after a stormy
voyage of almost four months dropped anchor off a pleasant point of
land, to which in gratitude they gave the name “Point Comfort.”


JAMESTOWN, THE FIRST ENGLISH SETTLEMENT

As they had been warned, however, to establish this settlement far up
a navigable river, out of danger from wandering vessels of the Spanish
Main, they entered the beautiful river of Powhatan, which they called
the James, and sailed up it for some fifty miles until they came to a
wooded island, which they chose as the site of their colony. There they
cut logs and built the rude huts which marked the site of Jamestown,
the first permanent English settlement within the limits of what we now
know as the United States of America.

[Illustration: THE MAYFLOWER

_The pilgrim ship is shown as it entered Plymouth Harbor bringing the
first New England settlers._]

Through sorrow and privations, surrounded by the nameless terrors of an
unknown wilderness, harassed by savages, and disheartened by sickness,
the little colony survived as by a miracle, and became the nucleus of a
nation. Of the old Jamestown nothing now remains but an ancient church
tower overgrown with ivy and a few crumbling tombstones. But its honor
remains, secure in the hearts of a grateful people.

[Illustration: EDWARD WINSLOW

_From the only portrait of a “Mayflower” pilgrim in existence. Edward
Winslow was one of the governors of Plymouth colony._]

The failure of the Popham colony had discouraged the Plymouth Company,
and it was not until Jamestown was a flourishing village that a
permanent settlement was made in the northern part of the region which
King James had granted to the Virginia Company. Those years had been
years of strife and sorrow in England. The king in the narrow bigotry
of his ecclesiastical views, had declared that if any refused to
conform to the rules of worship prescribed by the established Church
of England, he would “harry them out of the land,” and King James had
kept his word. Many Englishmen had been “harried out of the land,”
and had taken refuge on the continent of Europe; but the band for
whom history was reserving the largest place had escaped from Scrooby
in Nottinghamshire and established themselves at Leyden, Holland.
Here they had prospered; but they were still English, and, seeing
their children growing up with distinctly Dutch characteristics, they
determined to migrate to a land where the son of an Englishman would
grow up an Englishman. It is often said that the chief aim of the
Puritans was to settle in a land where they could worship God as they
pleased. This, however, they were quite at liberty to do in Holland.
It might be said with greater truthfulness that they desired to settle
in a land where they could compel others to worship God as they
commanded--and this they managed quite effectively for some years after
their landing.


THE PILGRIMS

They accordingly obtained from the London branch of the Virginia
Company permission to settle at the mouth of the Delaware, and from
the king the promise that he would “wink at their heresy.” When all
was ready, the youngest and strongest of the Leyden congregation, with
Brewster, Bradford, Winslow, and Myles Standish at their head, repaired
to Delft Haven, where they embarked for England upon the Speedwell.
At Southampton they were joined by the Mayflower, with recruits from
London, and the two little vessels turned their prows toward the vast
waters of the Atlantic.

[Illustration: PLYMOUTH ROCK

_The granite boulder on which the Pilgrims are said to have landed in
1620._]

The Speedwell, however, soon sprang a leak, and the two vessels entered
the harbor of Plymouth in Devonshire, where as many as possible of the
Speedwell’s passengers were transferred to the Mayflower, those who
could not be there accommodated being placed ashore. As the Mayflower
glided out of the harbor on September 6, 1620, the one hundred and
two devoted souls on board waved a sad farewell to their twenty
disconsolate fellow Pilgrims who stood on the quay. As the dim outlines
of ancient Cornwall faded from their view, the hearts of flesh cried
out, but the steady voice of the Spirit gave them courage; for to the
Puritan, in spite of his faults, which were many and great, duty was
always first, and the planting of the wilderness with the choicest
seed, as he modestly called himself, was a solemn duty laid upon him by
God.

[Illustration: Copr. 1906. A. S. Burbank, Plymouth, Mass.

NATIONAL MONUMENT TO THE FOREFATHERS

_Erected in remembrance of their sufferings for civil and religious
liberty._]

Driven from their course, lost on the vast oceans of an unknown world,
the little company pressed bravely on, and on November 9 sighted Cape
Cod, far to the north of their intended destination. Here their patent
was useless, and as some of the company in “discontented and mutinous
speeches” during the voyage had declared that “they would use their
own liberty” after landing, it was thought wise to draw up a compact
binding its signers to render “all due submission and obedience” to the
government therein provided. This document has been called the first
written constitution in the world’s history. It was not a constitution,
however; but only a compact.


PLYMOUTH ROCK

After five weeks of careful inspection of the coast they selected
for their colony a spot which Captain John Smith had already named
Plymouth, in honor of the lovely harbor from which they had sailed.
Here, as tradition says, upon a great rock, now known throughout the
world as Plymouth Rock, they landed on December 21, plowed through the
deep snow, and amid the “murmuring pines and the hemlocks” began to
build a House of God and about it rude cabins of logs. To this scene
every true American heart should turn with reverence, whatever his
creed, political affiliation, or sectional tradition; for it, more
than any other in American colonial history, typifies the spirit which
has made of America a great nation. At Plymouth, more even than at
Jamestown, the political doctrines which had grown out of Calvinistic
theology took firm root. In religion the Puritans were bigoted and
intolerant; but in political theories they represented the idea of
the freedom and dignity of the individual. The God-given right of
self-government was their political motto, and from it they never
swerved. The great contest which we call the American Revolution was
not, as is sometimes asserted, an attempt to throw off the shackles of
tyranny, but was, on the contrary, a determined refusal to allow these
shackles to be put on. George the Third and his obsequious minister,
Lord North, were the real revolutionists; for they sought to take
away from the American colonies rights of self-government as old as
Jamestown and Plymouth. In this they failed, and their failure cost
England an empire.

[Illustration: PLAN OF FORT TICONDEROGA

_A restoration begun in 1909. The first fort, called Fort Carillon, was
built by the French in 1755. It was taken by the British in 1758 and
rebuilt as Fort Ticonderoga._]


TICONDEROGA AND INDEPENDENCE HALL

[Illustration: THE ETHAN ALLEN HOUSE

_An inn at Dorset, Vermont, where the Revolutionary hero used to stop._]

[Illustration: TABLET AT TICONDEROGA

_On this rock are the names of Ticonderoga’s heroes, Champlain,
Montcalm, Lord Howe, Amherst and Burgoyne._]

To tax a man without his consent has always been, since Magna Charta
was written, contrary to the liberties of native-born Englishmen. It
was therefore contrary also to the liberties of native-born Americans,
and as such it was resisted by our ancestors of the revolutionary
epoch, as it had been resisted by our ancestors of the colonial era.
When, on May 10, 1775, Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold, sword in hand,
called upon the king’s ancient fortress of Ticonderoga to surrender,
giving as their authority “the great Jehovah and the Continental
Congress,” they were but putting into striking phrase the political
doctrines of Calvinism and seeking to enforce the royal promise
that Americans of whatever colony were entitled to “all Liberties,
Franchises, and Immunities … as if they had been abiding and born,
within this, our Realm of England.” And when the great political
figures of the Revolution--Adams, Witherspoon, Franklin, Jefferson, and
the rest--assembled in Independence Hall, Philadelphia, and signed the
Declaration of Independence, while the Liberty Bell pealed forth the
notes of freedom, they were but repeating the declaration of the first
American charter.

[Illustration: ETHAN ALLEN MONUMENT

_Erected at Manchester, Vt., to the daring frontiersman who captured
Fort Ticonderoga from the British._]

Our Revolution was thus a war calmly entered upon to maintain
immemorial rights and ancient institutions, whose preservation meant
liberty not alone for America, but for England as well. Today we can
clearly see what was at stake at Ticonderoga, at Bunker Hill, and upon
the long chain of Revolutionary battlefields, stretching from the lakes
to the faraway swamps of Georgia. Representative government hung in the
balance, and whenever we hear of a nation’s rising against despotism
and demanding that the people shall rule, we should add one more
blossom to the garland which we are weaving for the graves of the men
who gave Liberty to enlighten the world. Tennyson, with the soul of a
true poet, though writing for Englishmen, has expressed the thought for
all men:

    “Oh! Thou who sendest out the man,
      To rule by land and sea,
    Strong mother of a Lion-line,
    Be proud of those strong sons of thine,
    Who wrench’d their rights from Thee!”

[Illustration: LIBERTY BELL

_In Independence Hall, Philadelphia._]

Years passed by. The ideas which had triumphed in the Revolution grew
ever stronger in the nation that war had created. By slow degrees men
came to understand more fully what it meant for the people to rule.

[Illustration: ROOM IN INDEPENDENCE HALL

_The room where the Declaration of Independence was adopted July
4, 1776. Much of the original furniture is preserved here, and the
portraits of those who signed the Declaration hang about the walls._]

The colonies grew to populous cities, and the far off plains of Texas
became the field for pioneer activity: Austin, Houston, and a host of
others, with their love of “God’s out of doors,” left settled parts of
America and sought homes upon the spreading prairies of that distant
province of Mexico. With these men ideals of American freedom had
become instinctive, and from the very first a trial of strength was
inevitable between them and Santa Anna, the despotic ruler of Mexico.


THE ALAMO

The Alamo was a Franciscan mission, dating from the eighteenth century.
It was strongly built, and inclosed an area of about three acres, upon
which stood a roofless church and a few other crumbling buildings.
Its garrison consisted of 186 men, under Colonel Travis, and included
the famous frontiersmen, James Bowie and David Crockett. Sam Houston,
commander of the Texas forces, had ordered that the Alamo be blown up
and abandoned; but his orders had been disregarded, and the gallant
little garrison was now to pay the terrible price of its disobedience.

[Illustration: Copr. Archer’s Studios

PROPOSED ALAMO HEROES’ MONUMENT

_The tower will be 802 feet high, the loftiest in America, and will
cost 2,000,000 dollars._]

On February 23, 1836, the Alamo was invested by four thousand Mexican
soldiers and the final reckoning began. On March 6, after a gallant
defense, it was taken by storm, its garrison having been slaughtered to
a man. “Thermopylæ had its messenger of defeat--the Alamo had none,”
so runs the epitaph which stands upon the monument of these heroes of
liberty.

But the blood-avenger was at hand. A few weeks later Sam Houston,
standing with bared head before his little army of Texas patriots,
gathered at San Jacinto, gave the watchword, “Remember the Alamo!” and
within twenty minutes the army of Santa Anna was scattered “like the
chaff which the wind driveth away.” Texas was free.


GETTYSBURG

But I have mentioned one other battlefield, and one which in numbers
and in the military skill of those engaged, as well as in the
principles at stake, stands among the great battles of the world.
Gettysburg is a name which is justly mentioned with pride by Americans
of all sections; for when its aged veterans, North and South, can clasp
hands and declare themselves brothers, it would be presumptuous for
others to display the rancor of partizanship.

The settings of the battle were dramatic. Robert E. Lee, the ablest
commander of the Confederacy, had crossed into Pennsylvania with his
main column. The Federal army of the Potomac was close behind, intent
upon pressing northward after Lee to protect Baltimore should it be
endangered. Gettysburg lies in a fruitful valley of Pennsylvania, just
north of the Maryland borderline. It is walled in by low mountain
ranges studded with peaks--Culp’s Hill, Round Top, and Little Round
Top--whose names rouse thrilling memories. Here on July 1, 2, and 3,
1863, the two armies fought the most fearful and significant open
battle of the whole Civil War.

For the first two days fate favored the Confederate army, and “these
partial successes,” writes General Lee, “determined me to continue
the assault next day.” A movement was planned in which Pickett’s
division of Longstreet’s corps was to strike the Federal line in the
center, while Stuart with his cavalry attacked it in the rear. It was a
desperate venture, and Longstreet declared that when the moment came
for ordering Pickett and his gallant five thousand to advance, his lips
refused to form the words, and to the calm inquiry, “General, shall
I advance?” he could only reply by an affirmative bow. Within thirty
minutes two thousand of the detachment had fallen, and of the officers
who had headed this desperate venture, only Pickett and one lieutenant
came out unharmed.

Stuart had failed to reach the Federal rear in time to aid the attack
which, unsustained, had ended in disaster. “It was all my fault,”
generously commented Lee, when the whole tragic result was understood,
“Let us do the best we can toward saving that which is left us.” Meade
made no attempt at pursuit. Lee led his army back to Virginia and was
safe.

In an order of July 4, Meade had used the expression, “driving the
invader from our soil,” which, when the great, sad-eyed Lincoln read,
he heaved a deep sigh and remarked, “Will our generals never get that
idea out of their heads? The whole country is our soil.”

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG

_This struggle, the crisis of our Civil War and one of the great
battles of the world, raged for three days._]

    SUPPLEMENTARY READING--John Fiske’s “Old Virginia and Her
    Neighbors,” “Beginnings of New England,” “The Critical Period
    of American History,” and “The American Revolution”; “True
    Relation of Virginia,” Smith; “Plymouth Plantation,” Bradford;
    “Sam Houston,” Bruce; “Stuart’s Cavalry in the Gettysburg
    Campaign,” John S. Mosby.




THE MENTOR

ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY BY

The Mentor Association, Inc.

381 Fourth Ave., New York, N. Y.

                     Volume 1           Number 32
                           Serial Number 32

    ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS.
    FOREIGN POSTAGE, 75 CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE, 50 CENTS EXTRA.
    ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK, N. Y., AS SECOND-CLASS
    MATTER. COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC., PRESIDENT
    AND TREASURER, R. M. DONALDSON; VICE-PRESIDENT, W. M. SANFORD;
    SECRETARY, L. D. GARDNER.


_Editorial_

The Mentor Association is less than a year old. The Mentor plan
is a few months older than that. But the idea of which The Mentor
Association is the outgrowth is one of the oldest in the world. It is
as old as Curiosity--and just as human. The “Wonder Why” of Curiosity
is always linked with the “Want to Know.” The two lead on to Knowledge.
What has always been wanted and what is wanted now is a quick, easy and
agreeable way of getting Knowledge. That is what The Mentor Association
gives.

The plan of The Mentor Association fills so definitely a real want,
that every one ought to know about it. All members of the Association
and all others who see The Mentor will want to know not only what we
have done and are doing, but what we shall do for months in the future.
In a broad, popular, educational plan of this kind there should be
the fullest confidence. The importance of this grows week by week,
for The Mentor idea has drawn the interest of many thousands, and the
membership increases day by day.

Though these lines are headed “editorial,” we feel a good deal of
hesitancy in using the word. It gives the impression that The Mentor is
simply a magazine, while actually it is much more than that. It is an
important part of a broad educational plan, which includes an Inquiry
Department, Suggested Courses of Reading, and other advantages.

It is not easy to find the exact word for a plan of this sort. Some day
a brief phrase will come to us--no doubt some member of the Association
will supply it--that will tell fully and adequately all that The Mentor
Association stands for. We have described it many times. We cover the
plan fairly well when we say in our prospectus that “the purpose of The
Mentor Association is to make it easy to learn the things we want to
know and ought to know,” but in that we say nothing of the beautiful
pictures, which are a most important feature. There is a value in
the stimulating phrase that we use, “Learn one thing every day,” but
there is no hint in that of the delight afforded by the exquisite
illustrations furnished in The Mentor. In the service of The Mentor
Association Information and Art go hand in hand.

The quick recognition of the value of The Mentor plan during the
eight months of its existence is naturally gratifying, but what is
most interesting is the wide reach of its appeal. We have hundreds
of letters coming to us from all sources, and the message is much
the same, whether it be a lawyer, a college professor, a teacher, a
clubwoman, an engineer or a doctor. The burden of all these messages
can be summed up in three phrases: First, “The idea is fine”; second,
“You have carried it out admirably”; and third, “It fills a real want.”

We have referred to our prospectus. This is a booklet in which the
plans and purposes of The Mentor Association are fully described, and
the schedule of the year is given. It also tells something of what we
have in preparation for 1914. Send for copies of this prospectus. If
you are a member of The Mentor Association you will, of course, want
it, and you should have some extra copies to give to your friends. You
will be doing them a service.




[Illustration: JAMESTOWN TOWER]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_Jamestown_

ONE


Slowly up the river three vessels made their way with the light though
favoring breeze. Gradually the open of the bay was passed, as, two days
previously, the open of the sea had been left behind. Now the land was
closing in on each side, and both ships were alive with the figures of
those who stood eagerly scanning the shore. And what they saw was a
welcome sight. The April sun was shining on the forests of both banks;
elms, they saw, like old friends, stretching out their branches in
friendly protection; oaks, too, knotted and gnarled, seemed to voice a
welcome. On nearer approach they noticed masses of dogwood in brilliant
bloom, and other shrubs in flower, whose fragrance was wafted over to
them as a pleasant incense. And there was a riot of sweet birds’ songs
coming out of the woods.

Truly, it was a paradise that they had come to, and many fell on their
knees in thanksgiving that they had safely crossed the seas and been
guided to a land of such beauty. Till night they sailed on up the
river, and then the sails were furled, the anchor dropped, and their
long journey was at an end.

Thus came the colonists who, a few weeks later, founded Jamestown in
Virginia, the first English settlement in America, which they named
after King James I. Starting in three small vessels, one of them but
twenty tons in burden, they had taken more than four months in crossing.

At first they had only tents to live in. It was late to plant, and food
was not plentiful. And they soon learned that terror and death lurked
in the land. Indians had stolen up, and with bows and arrows wounded
seventeen of the men and killed a boy. The thunder of muskets drove
them away; but the settlers felt it necessary to keep regular watch,
and each man sat up every third night to take his turn. Those first few
months were hard, and many died. Then they built cabins, and enjoyed
more comfort.

Captain Smith, later a governor, was absent much of the time, buying
food from the Indians. Two years afterward he went home, and the months
that followed were called the “Starving Time,” when all but sixty of
the four hundred settlers died.

Yet, through many tribulations, Jamestown lived. In 1608 it was
burned, and other cabins were built. In 1619 word was received that a
representative government had been granted. The settlers were each to
have a portion of ground, and plantations were gradually laid out along
the James. In spite of Indian massacres the colony and all Virginia
grew.

In 1676 Jamestown was burned by Nathaniel Bacon, who had risen against
the autocratic rule of the governor. In 1691 the capital of Virginia
was removed from Jamestown to Williamsburg, and the importance of the
old colony ceased, until it is now but a site of ruins.

It was on low and marshy ground that later became an island. There are
monuments erected in commemoration of the colony, of Captain Smith and
Pocahontas, and a church that resembles the one first built.

The Jamestown Exposition in 1907 was held near Norfolk, forty miles
down the river.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PLYMOUTH ROCK]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_Plymouth Rock_

TWO


The little ship hove to and the sails were furled upon the yards. The
long journey was over. There, on the harbor’s edge, rose the hill that
was to become so familiar in after years to those who had spent these
many weeks at sea. There too, below the hill and on the very shore,
projected the great boulder of granite upon which they were to make
their landing, which would ever afterward be famous. Here, at last, was
freedom in a new land, freedom to think and worship as they pleased!
And the voyagers were jubilant.

It was cold, for Christmas was only four days off; but the spirits
of the Pilgrims were not dampened. The armed men went ashore to
reconnoiter, and soon returned with the word that it was a likely
spot. Then for many days there was a sound of axes clearing the land
and felling trees to build houses with; the smoke of many fires
brought with it the odor of burning pine. But the buoyant spirits of
the colonists could not long withstand the penetrating cold. Food was
poor and scarce, and none was to be had from the surrounding country.
Sickness came, and death broke into the ranks. Indeed, before the close
of that first winter nearly half of the colonists had perished. They
were buried upon the hill near the harbor, and in the spring grain was
sowed over their graves that the Indians might not see how terribly the
little company had suffered.

Friendly Indians showed them how to plant their corn, putting fish into
the hills to fertilize it. Other colonists came; other colonies were
established--and so New England was born.

The story of gruff, big-hearted Myles Standish, the military captain
of Plymouth, and Priscilla Mullins, is inseparably connected with the
colony. Captain Standish had many encounters with the Indians. A fort
was built, and, while in general the Indians were friendly, the men
of the little army under his command were constantly on the lookout
for trouble that might arise. Once a conspiracy was detected, and the
Indians put to death with the very weapons they had brought to use upon
the people of the colony.

In 1624 each member of the colony received a parcel of land, which he
was allowed to work for himself. After that there was always plenty of
food in Plymouth. The colony was united with that of Massachusetts Bay
in 1691.

Today Plymouth is a busy city of more than 12,000 people. The great
boulder upon which the Pilgrims stepped is still there at the harbor
edge, and a protecting canopy of granite has been built above it. The
bones of some of the Pilgrims have been placed within the canopy.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: TICONDEROGA]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_Ticonderoga_

THREE


Darkness had fallen long before the men of Vermont came to the lakes.
Through woods where giant trees reached upward and made the darkness
impenetrable they had marched, stumbling along, feeling their way,
often bumping into trees or falling over logs. Now at the lake shore
they were ready to embark. Silently they moved to and fro, and the only
sound was the lapping of the water against the shore and the roar of
the falls. Just a few boats could be found; but they were filled and
rowed across in silence, brought back, filled again, and again rowed
across. When dawn broke in the east eighty-three American soldiers had
been ferried over, and it was too late to wait for more.

If the attack was to be a success it must be made without more delay.
With the utmost caution, therefore, the men moved forward and up the
slope. The rumble of the falls helped them, drowning out all other
sounds. They reached the sally port. There a sentry pointed his musket
at the leader of the Americans and pulled the trigger. The piece did
not go off, and the sentry fled. In a few moments the little army
of invaders had formed a hollow square within the fort, facing the
barracks about them, their muskets ready to fire. The Indian war-cry
was given, and Ethan Allen, who led them, made his way to the quarters
of the commandant, and demanded the surrender of the fort.

“In whose name,” asked the commandant.

“In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress,”
replied Allen. And the surrender was made. So easily and quietly did
Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold capture Ticonderoga from the British
on that early morning in May, 1775, without the loss of a man or the
firing of a gun, and the army of the colonies was enriched by many
precious cannon, muskets, and a large amount of ammunition for the
struggle for freedom that had but started.

“Sounding waters” is the interpretation given to the Indian name,
Ticonderoga. Here, where the waters of Lake George descend tumultuously
into Lake Champlain, falling thirty feet in one sheer drop, where the
voyagers from Canada to New England had to leave their boats, and
portage their loads, a fort had been built by the French twenty years
before. Three years after it was put up, Ticonderoga was attacked by
six thousand British regulars and ten thousand provincials. The four
thousand men of the French garrison repulsed the attacking army, and
among the killed was Lord Howe. His memory is kept fresh by a tablet
in Westminster Abbey, erected by the people of Massachusetts. Three
weeks after this repulse, when Montcalm had gone to Quebec to oppose
General Wolfe and only four hundred men were left in the fort, Lord
Amherst, with eleven thousand English, besieged it. Realizing the
hopelessness of their task, the garrison blew up the fortifications
and abandoned the place. It had been in English hands since that time
up to its capture by the “Green Mountain Boys” under Ethan Allen. Two
years later, when General Burgoyne descended from Canada, the fort was
captured, while the Americans retreated after a feeble resistance. But
when Burgoyne surrendered, after the battle of Saratoga, Ticonderoga
again fell into American hands.

In 1909, on the three hundredth anniversary of the discovery of Lake
Champlain, the owner of the ground on which the ruins of the fort stood
began its restoration.

The waters still roar at the falls as they did on the night Ethan Allen
and his Green Mountain Boys made the bloodless attack upon the fort.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: INDEPENDENCE HALL]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_Independence Hall_

FOUR


Of the sixty American gentlemen in frosted wigs and silk stockings,
who sat in what is now Independence Hall in Philadelphia and composed
the Continental Congress, there was none more aristocratic by birth,
more democratic by nature, than Thomas Jefferson. Perhaps that was one
reason why they selected him to pen the Declaration of Independence,
adopted on July 4, 1776, which remains today America’s most sacred
historical document. He was sufficiently modest, however, to insist
that in writing the Declaration he simply put down the ideas prevalent
at the time.

This Continental Congress was the first body of men at that time
sitting in any of the parliaments of the world. These statesmen had the
courage to break an old order, the valor to maintain a new one, and the
wisdom to fortify it with laws and a constitution. The first and second
Congress of our nation comprised the flower of the character of that
age. As a whole body they ruled higher for talents, firmness, and good
judgment than any national assembly known to history.

So when it came to a division between allegiance to England and a
complete separation from the mother country, these men chose wisely,
bravely, and confidently. It was a big step to take, and a dangerous
one also. Hitherto the colonies had been merely fighting for “no
taxation without representation”; but now they would be fighting for
liberty. And, if conquered, the leaders could hope for no better fate
than execution as traitors.

It is related that when Benjamin Franklin lifted his pen, after signing
the Declaration of Independence, he turned to the assembly and said
with a grim smile:

“Now, gentlemen, we must all hang together, or we shall hang
separately.”

The Declaration of Independence was adopted on July 4, 1776; but not
all the members of the Continental Congress signed it on that day. A
great many signed at later dates.

The old bell that rang out this message of liberty is now kept as an
almost sacred relic in Independence Hall. When the Pennsylvanians were
building their State edifice they ordered a bell from England. But
when it arrived they found that it had lost its voice and had to be
recast. A quotation was inscribed on the new bell, which, though chosen
a quarter of a century in advance of the Declaration of Independence,
showed the direction in which the thoughts of all the people of America
were even then turning--“Proclaim Liberty throughout the land unto all
the inhabitants thereof.” This quotation was taken from the tenth verse
of the twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus.

The bell was afterward used on various occasions of national
importance; but was cracked in 1835 in tolling for the funeral of Chief
Justice Marshall, and since 1843 has never been sounded.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: THE ALAMO]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_The Alamo_

FIVE


Two men who were riding up the heights dismounted, left their horses,
and walked to the top. The scene before them was one that tried their
souls,--a great circle of troops; here and there a battery of guns;
in the center a low rambling building of adobe, at which the fire was
directed.

“It’s no use, Bonham,” said the elder of the two. “We can’t do it. To
try to get in now would be certain death. You have done your best to
get assistance; you can do no more.”

“Smith,” replied the other, “I am going in. Travis sent me for help. It
is right for you to turn back; but I cannot. I will report the results
of my mission or die in the attempt.”

Putting a white handkerchief in his hat brim and fastening it there he
mounted the splendid cream-colored horse. The two men clasped hands and
looked into each other’s eyes for a moment, and then Bonham rode down
toward the beleaguered fort. Smith saw him reach the Mexican lines and
spur his horse on. He was apparently unnoticed for a time, and then
the fire of hundreds was turned upon him. Bending low in the saddle,
man and horse seemed to fly over the ground. Hundreds of bullets must
have whizzed past him; but he seemed to have a charmed life. On and on
he went, and the fire against him grew heavier. But now the men of the
garrison had seen the white handkerchief, which had been agreed upon as
a signal, and a cheer went up. The gates of the fort swung open. The
horse went faster. Smith saw horse and rider reach the fort, and the
gates swing to behind them. They had gone unscathed through the entire
Mexican army.

The Alamo at San Antonio, originally built for a mission, had been
taken by the Texans in their efforts to gain independence from Mexico.
Garrisoned by a few men under Col. William Barrett Travis, it was
surrounded on February 23, 1836, by an army variously estimated at from
3,000 to 8,000 men, under General Santa Anna.

With his force of 150 Texans, among them Colonel Bowie, David Crockett,
frontiersman and ex-member of Congress, and James Butler Bonham, a
friend from boyhood days of Colonel Travis, the last named made a
gallant fight against overwhelming odds. Messengers had been despatched
to summon help, and finally Travis sent his friend out to bring
assistance. At the first place he tried, appeals were of no avail,
and he rode on to Gonzales. There he found that Captain Martin and
thirty-two men had gone to the assistance of the besieged men, fighting
their way into the fort. So he returned.

Three days after Bonham’s ride the Mexican army made a general assault.
All but six of the brave garrison were killed, and these, surrendering
on condition of parole, were butchered in cold blood. The Mexicans
lost 1,600 men. On April 21 the Mexican army overtook General Houston
and his army of 780 men at San Jacinto. The battle cry of the Texans
was “Remember the Alamo!” and the enraged men of the little army cut
the Mexican forces to pieces, killing 630 and capturing nearly all the
rest. Thus Texas won her independence.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: GETTYSBURG]




_HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA_

_Gettysburg_

SIX


Gettysburg was the high-water mark of the Rebellion, and Pickett’s
charge was the high-water mark of Gettysburg. In that terrific
engagement of the third day the advance of the Confederates into
northern territory was effectually checked, and the question of the
Confederacy maintaining a position in northern territory was settled.
Lee turned south with his defeated and broken forces, and as the
booming of the guns of Gettysburg died down, the Confederate cause
ebbed away.

When the battle started, more than two hundred cannon hurled shot and
shell across a lovely green valley with yellowing grain fields. The
carnage and the roar and smoke of guns continued until the Confederate
gunners began to run short of ammunition; then, on the third day, came
a lull. It was an ominous silence. Down from the one hill surged a line
of gray, and another, and another. The Confederate forces charged on
across the valley, and still the Federal batteries reserved their fire.
The supreme moment was at hand. North and South hung upon the issue
with drawn breath. Then as the gray army mounted the opposite hill,
rifles and cannon thundered again, line after line broke and fell; but
still the charging body of the Confederates kept on. They captured the
first Federal outworks, and staggered on toward the second. But the
Union fire had been too deadly. No human bravery could withstand such
losses. The gray lines fell back, leaving most of their men dead on the
field. Thus with the third day of the Battle of Gettysburg over, the
climax of the war was past.

The little town round which the battle raged was settled about 1740,
and in 1800 it became the county seat. It holds the oldest Lutheran
college in America, and likewise the oldest Lutheran theological
seminary. Today the valley is a beautiful national park, with the lines
of battle marked by six hundred monuments, five hundred iron tablets,
one thousand markers, and hundreds of cannon. Observation towers enable
the visitor to see the surrounding country.

It is a curious fact that neither side had intended to fight at
Gettysburg, General Meade having determined to make a stand at
Pipes Creek, fifteen miles distant. But Lee’s troops, coming into
contact with a body of Union cavalry near Gettysburg, July 1, 1863,
precipitated the battle, and both armies hurried to the scene. The
Federal troops were forced back, retreating through the village, and
took position on Cemetery Hill, just beyond. At one time in his march
toward Gettysburg, General Lee was within a few miles of the main
ammunition stores of the Federal army, which, had he known it, he could
easily have captured.

Both sides suffered tremendous losses. Of an army of 75,000 Lee lost
43,000 killed, wounded, and captured, and Meade 23,000 in killed and
wounded out of 90,000. In Pickett’s charge, out of fifteen regimental
commanders, ten were killed and five wounded. One regiment lost 90 per
cent. of its members; of 4,500 officers and men 3,393 were left on the
field.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 32, SERIAL No. 32
    COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: HISTORIC SPOTS OF AMERICA, VOL. 1, NUM. 32, SERIAL NO. 32 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


