The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Treatise of Buggs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Treatise of Buggs

Author: John Southall

Illustrator: Gerard Vandergucht

Release date: August 1, 2015 [eBook #49564]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE OF BUGGS ***

[Illustration:

  _Nitts_
  _one day Old_
  _3 days_
  _1 week_
  _2 weeks_
  _3 weeks_
  _4 weeks_
  _5 weeks_
  _6 weeks_
  _7 weeks_
  _8 weeks_
  _9 weeks_
  _10 weeks_
  _full grown Europeans_
  _full grown American_

  _G. VanderGucht sculp._
]




  A
  TREATISE
  OF
  BUGGS:

  SHEWING

  When and How they were first brought into _England_. How they are
  brought into and infect Houses.

  Their Nature, several Foods, Times and Manner of Spawning and
  Propagating in this Climate.

  Their great INCREASE accounted for, by Proof of the Numbers each Pair
  produce in a Season.

  REASONS given why all Attempts hitherto made for their Destruction
  have proved ineffectual.

  VULGAR ERRORS concerning them refuted.

  That from _September_ to _March_ is the best Season for their total
  Destruction, demonstrated by Reason, and proved by Facts.


Concluding with

  DIRECTIONS for such as have them not already, how to avoid them; and
  for those that have them, how to destroy them.


By _JOHN SOUTHALL_,

  Maker of the Nonpareil Liquor for destroying _Buggs_ and _Nits_,
  living at the _Green Posts_ in the _Green Walk_ near _Faulcon-stairs,
  Southwark_.


  The SECOND EDITION.

  _LONDON_: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the _Oxford-Arms_
  in _Warwick-Lane_. M.DCC.XXX.

  (Price One Shilling.)




[Illustration]




TO

Sir HANS SLOANE, Bart.

  First Physician in Ordinary to His MAJESTY; President of the ROYAL
  SOCIETY, and also of the College of Physicians.


_SIR_,

Your ready Condescension to peruse the following Treatise, and to see
the Experiments of my Liquor, both in regard to its bringing out,
and destroying Buggs; as also that of its no ways staining Furniture;
was to me the happy Presage of your Favour, and Approbation of my
Performances.

The Satisfaction of having this Treatise and Experiments approv’d by
You, the Best of Judges, was to me the greatest Honour I could wish
for; but the additional one, confer’d by your introducing me to the
_Royal Society_, and there having not only their unanimous Approbation,
but yours and their Thanks for my Discoveries and Intent of publishing
them, was beyond my Hopes, and a Pleasure so great, as to be past
expressing; in regard that it dissipates all my Fears for its Success,
and makes me justly hope it will meet with a candid Reception from, and
be of general Benefit to the Publick.

As to your Goodness, I must ascribe the happy Prospect of its proving
so, Gratitude obliges me in this manner to acknowledge it; and to be,

      _Sir_,
    _Your Much-Obliged_,
  _And Most Obedient Servant_,

      JOHN SOUTHALL.




[Illustration]




  THE
  PREFACE.


_Being diffident of my own Performance, and desirous it should stand or
fall by the Opinion of the Best of Judges, was the Motive that induced
me to make my Application to that very Learned, truly Judicious and
commendably Curious Person to whom it’s dedicated: At the same time
determining, that if he approv’d of it, I would publish it; and if
he disapprov’d, that I would burn it. But it happily meeting his
Approbation, it now makes its Appearance in Print: Tho’ I must in
Justice to him acknowledge, it could not have so done so soon, nor
with such Embellishments, had he not only forwarded the Impression,
but directed and order’d the Copper-plate. As it has not only his
Approbation, but also, by his introducing it, the unanimous Concurrent
Approbation of (those great Encouragers of things useful) the Royal
Society; I hope it will not fail of meeting a kind Reception from the
Inhabitants in and about this Metropolis; by whom, as such a Treatise,
&c. was most wanted, for their Benefit and Ease it was at first chiefly
design’d._

_Tho’ with such Helps as it now has, I am not without Hopes that it may
extend its Qualities to distant infected Places._

_I should think it a Duty Incumbent on me, and would wait on the
Venerable Members of the aforesaid Society, present when my Manuscript
was read, personally to return them my Thanks for the Honours
conferr’d on me. But as the Names and Places of Abode of most are
unknown to me, I humbly beg they will accept this Acknowledgement of
them, by their_

  Obliged and Obedient Servant,

      JOHN SOUTHALL.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




  A
  TREATISE
  OF
  BUGGS.


As Buggs have been known to be in _England_ above sixty Years, and
every Season increasing so upon us, as to become terrible to almost
every Inhabitant in and about this Metropolis, it were greatly to be
wished that some more learned Person than my self, studious for the
Good of Human Kind, and the Improvement of natural Knowledge, would
have oblig’d the Town with some Treatise, Discourse or Lecture on that
nauseous venomous Insect.

But as none such have attempted it, and I have ever since my return
from _America_ made their destruction my Profession, and was at first
much baffled in my Attempts for want, (as I then believ’d, and have
since found) of truly knowing the Nature of those intolerable Vermin:
I determined by all means possible to try if I could discover and
find out as much of their Nature, Feeding and Breeding, as might be
conducive to my being better able to destroy them.

And tho’ in attempting it I must own I had a View at private Gain, as
well as the publick Good; yet I hope my Design will appear laudable,
and the Event answer both Ends.

The late Learned and truly Valuable Dr. _Woodward_, to whom I first
communicated my Intent, not only approv’d the Design, but also the
Methods which, I told him, I design’d to pursue, to attain the desired
Effects: and at the same time was so good to give me some useful Hints
and Instructions, the better to accomplish an Affair, which he said
’twas his Opinion would be a general Good.

Not to make this Acknowledgement of his kind Assistance, would be
Ingratitude to my dear deceas’d Friend.

As I had his Approbation at the beginning, had he but liv’d till now,
I doubt not but the Discoveries I have made would have appear’d so
considerable and useful, as might have entitled me to his farther
Friendship and Assistance, in methodizing this Treatise for Publication.

But depriv’d of him, my first and greatest Encourager, I have ventur’d
to let it appear in the best Dress my Capacity will admit. Should the
Stile and my Manner of handling the Subject to be treated of, appear
uncouth and displease, I hope the Usefulness of it to the Publick will
make some amends for that Defect.

In treating on these Insects, some part of the Discourse may perhaps
at first View appear surprizing, if not incredible to the Readers:
But by giving them an account how I attain’d my Knowledge, and by
often reiterated Experiments prov’d them to be certain Facts, they
will soon alter their Opinion; and the whole, I hope, will not only
be acceptable, diverting and instructive to the Readers, but also
of universal Benefit to the Inhabitants in and about _London_ and
_Westminster_.

This Treatise being on a Subject as much wanted as any whatever, and
the Pains and Trouble I have taken to arrive at my Knowledge herein,
having been uncommon; it may be expected by the Curious, that I should
give some of the Reasons that first induced me to undertake a Discovery
so very difficult to appearance.

It may not therefore be unnecessary to acquaint such, that in the
Year 1726, my Affairs requiring my going to the _West-Indies_, I
had not been long there arrived, before, (the Climate not agreeing
with my Constitution) I fell sick, had a Complication of the Country
Distempers, lost the Use of my Limbs, and was given over by the best
Physicians at _Kingstown_ in _Jamaica_.

But, contrary to their Expectation, recovering a little, they advis’d
me to stay no longer in a Country, so prejudicial and dangerous to me,
than till I could get Shipping for _England_; and in the mean time
desired that as often as I was able, I would ride out for the Benefit
of the Air; which as soon as I had Strength enough, I did.

In one of my Journeys meeting with an uncommon Negro, the Hair or
(rather) Wooll on his Head, Beard, and Breast being as white as Snow,
I stopt my Horse to look on him; and he coming, as their way is, to
beg a little Tobacco, I gave it, and enquir’d if he had been always so
white-hair’d. He answer’d, no; but Age had made him so.

Observing that he moved briskly, had no Wrinkles, and all his Teeth,
I told him I could not believe him to be very old, at the same time
desiring to know his Age. His Answer was, he knew not himself; but
this he knew, that he was one of the first Slaves brought into that
Island, after the _English_ had taken it in _Oliver Cromwell_’s time,
and was then a great Boy.

By this account I judged, and might reasonably suppose him upwards of
ninety Years of Age.

Whilst we were in discourse, he perceiving me often rub and scratch,
where my Face and Eyes were much swelled with Bugg-Bites, asked if
Chintses, (so Buggs are by Negroes and some others there called) had
bit me? On my answering, yes; he said, he wonder’d white Men should let
them bite; they should do something to kill them, as he did.

This unexpected Expression excited in me a Curiosity to have farther
Discourse with him; and on my telling him, that for my part I should
be extreme glad to know how to destroy those Disturbers of my Rest,
and that if he would tell me how, I would give him some more Tobacco
and a Bit, (a Piece of _Spanish_ Money, there current at Seven-pence
Half-Penny:) On this he agreed to give me a Calibash full of Liquor,
which he said would certainly do it, following the Directions he gave
me.

Possess’d of this, well pleas’d I went home, and tho’ much fatigued, I
could not forbear using some of it before I went to sleep; and to my
surprize, the instant I applied it, vast Numbers did, (as he had told
me they would) come out of their Holes, and die before my face.

These I swept up, threw away, and went to Bed, and had much better Rest
than usual, not being Bugg-bit then, as I always was before.

But what added to my Satisfaction, and further surpriz’d me, was, that
when I got up I found many more had come out in the Night and were dead.

On this, I conceiv’d so great an Opinion of the Goodness and Usefulness
of this Liquor, that I was resolved to endeavour, and if possible to
prevail on him to teach me how to make it; well knowing so valuable
a Secret was much wanted, and would be highly useful, if I lived to
return to _England_.

In order to obtain it, I got some _English_ Beef, Pork, Biscuit and
Beer, and some Tobacco, believing those sooner than Money or any other
thing would procure from the Negro, what I so much wanted and desired.

The next day early I went, and finding my Negro in his Hutt, I asked if
he could dress me some Victuals. On his replying, yes, if he had it;
I open’d my Store-Bags, took out one Piece of Beef, some Biscuits and
a Bottle of Beer, taking care at the same time he should see the rest.
We eat a Biscuit, drank some Beer, and to dressing the Beef with some
Yams out of his Plantation, he eagerly went: all Negroes being greedy
of Flesh, when they can come at it; some of them not eating any for
many Years together, but live altogether on the Produce of the Earth.

Whilst he was intent on Cooking and in a good Humour, I took the
Opportunity of telling him, I had used and so well approved of his
Liquor, that if he would learn me how to make it, all the Victuals and
Tobacco in the Bags, and what Liquor we did not drink whilst I staid,
I would give to him, as a Recompence for the Favour.

At first he refused, believing me (as I found by his discourse) to be
a _Creolian_, whom the Negroes in general hate; but upon my convincing
him I was an _Englishman_, and returning home, the good Chear prevail’d.

After eating together, into the Woods and Savannahs we went, to gather
such of the Materials as grew not on his Plantation, or that he had not
by him; and returning to his Hutt, to making the Liquor he went.

I remark’d well, and set down the Names, Quantities, and his way of
making and mixing the Composition; which being done, all the Bottles we
emptied of Beer were fill’d with the Liquor; with which I return’d to
_Kingstown_, being as well pleas’d with my Discovery, as the Negro was
with my Presents.

Having thus obtain’d my most material Point, I could not yet forbear
going every time I rode out, to see and discourse my Negro, and never
went empty-handed, being desirous to try if I could discover any thing
further from him or of him, and how he attain’d the great Knowledge I
found he had in the medicinal Virtues of Roots, Plants, _&c._

He inform’d me, that during about fifty Years that he was a Slave (in
which time six of his Masters had died) he oft wish’d for Death, and
sought no means to preserve Life, and was then so infirm, as to be
thought by his seventh Master to be past labour; and having been a good
and faithful Slave, his said Master gave him his Freedom, and the piece
of Ground I found him upon, to live on.

That Liberty having render’d Life more agreeable to him, he then
studied all means to preserve it, and having some knowledge of things
proper to preserve as well as support him, he had ever since planted,
_&c._ in his Plantation, things proper for Physick as well as Food.

And indeed his Ground might be called a Physick-Garden, rather than
a Provision-Plantation; for of the latter he only raised enough to
support himself, of the former to supply others as well as himself, and
frequently made Medicines for his sick Acquaintance and others with
success. This Account I had of him from many, as well as from himself;
which made me entertain so good an opinion of his Skill and Fidelity,
that I ventur’d to take a Medicine made by him, by the use of which I
found great Benefit in the restoring me to the Use of my Limbs.

’Twas owing to his Skill that he had thus preserv’d himself to so great
an Age; and ’tis my Opinion, he had attain’d to a greater knowledge of
the physical Use of the Vegetables of that Country, than any illiterate
Person ever had done before him.

Believing some of the Materials not to be had in _Europe_, I procured
of him a quantity, and soon after returned to _England_.

On my arrival at _London_ in _August_ 1727, I made some Liquor to
compare with his, (which I found exactly the same) whereupon I
set about destroying of Buggs, and found to my Satisfaction, that
wherever I apply’d it, it brought out and kill’d ’em all. At length
I advertis’d, had great business, and pleased every body, then
apprehending no return of the Vermin. But yet, to my surprize, tho’
I had kill’d all the old ones, young ones sometimes, in some places,
would appear.

To my Liquor’s being then so strong and oleous, that I durst not
venture to liquor the Furniture for fear of damaging it, I at first
attributed the coming of those young Buggs.

Whereupon I studied to find an Allay for that Quality; which at length,
after many Experiments, and with much difficulty, I found out, and to
such a perfection, that I can and do with safety liquor the richest
of Furniture, as well as the Wood-work of Beds; and tho’ the staining
Quality be taken off, the valuable attractive and destructive parts of
the Composition still retain their full Virtue.

Having gain’d this great Point, I then went on briskly, and destroyed
Buggs and Nits in all Beds and Furniture wherever I came: But yet Young
Ones from behind Wainscot and out of Walls would sometimes afterwards
appear, get to the Beds for better quarters and food, and become
troublesome.

This much perplex’d me; but these unforeseen and then unknown
Difficulties, which might have discouraged a less enterprizing Genius,
prompted me the more to find the Cause and Means to overcome them;
which I conjectur’d might best be done, by finding their Nature and
Method of Breeding, Feeding, _&c._

In order to it, I enquir’d of many Booksellers, if any Book concerning
them had ever been published; but finding none, I then made it my
business to discourse as many learned, curious, and antient Men as I
possibly could, concerning them; but all that ever I could gather from
either, was the following Account, how and when they were first known
to be brought and to breed in _England_.

_Viz._ “That soon after the Fire of _London_, in some of the new-built
Houses they were observ’d to appear, and were never noted to have been
seen in the old, tho’ they were then so few, as to be little taken
notice of; yet as they were only seen in Firr-Timber, ’twas conjectur’d
they were then first brought to _England_ in them; of which most of the
new Houses were partly built, instead of the good Oak destroy’d in the
old.”

In the above Account of their first coming, Esquire _Pitfield_ and Mr.
_White_, a Chymist, Men of great Probity and Curiosity, agreed.

And as the Sap of Deal is one of their beloved Foods, this probably
might be the first way they were brought. How they are still brought, I
shall speak to more fully hereafter, in my Instructions to avoid them.

Finding no satisfactory Account of their Nature, Breeding, and Feeding,
to be come at from others, I was resolved assiduously to set about
and try all possible ways to attain it myself. My first Step was to
purchase and try Microscopes, and all such Helps as could be got,
and to devise such others as might contribute thereto; by which I am
enabled to give you the following Descriptions of Buggs, _&c._ which
the better to illustrate, is annexed from a Copper-Plate, curiously
engraven by the famous Mr. _Vandergucht_, the different Species and
Sizes of Buggs, as well as one correctly and finely magnified.

I was not so fond of my own Performance, as to think my Treatise
merited so great an Ornament. But as the Learned and Judicious Sir HANS
SLOANE had done me the Honour to peruse and approve of my Manuscript,
and thought it worthy thereof, and also desired and directed the doing
the said Plate by so good a Hand; I should have been wanting to myself,
had I not, in deference and respect to his Opinion and Request,
annex’d the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Bugg’s Body is shaped and shelled, and the Shell as transparent and
finely striped as the most beautiful amphibious Turtle; has six Legs
most exactly shaped, jointed and bristled as the Legs of a Crab. Its
Neck and Head much resembles a Toad’s. On its Head are three Horns
picqued and bristled; and at the end of their Nose they have a Sting
sharper and much smaller than a Bee’s. The Use of their Horns is in
Fight to assail their Enemies, or defend themselves. With the Sting
they penetrate and wound our Skins, and then (tho’ the Wound is so
small as to be almost imperceptible) they thence by Suction extract
their most delicious Food, our Blood. This Sucking the Wound so given,
is what we improperly call biting us.

By often nightly watching and daily observing them with the best of
Helps, having discover’d Males from Females, I determin’d, and then
did put up a Pair in a Glass, as believing that to keep them the Year
round, would be the only and best way to find the Nature of their
breeding, feeding, _&c._ and be a means to discover what had occasion’d
the Difficulties I had met with in my Endeavours and Practice of
destroying them.

As the Thought was _à propos_, and the Event having answer’d
Expectation, I shall now inform you of my Observations and Discoveries
thereby made.

As I put up the Pair aforesaid, so did I another Pair that day
Fortnight, and so every Fortnight for eighteen Months, did I put up
others, with various Foods.

The first, second, third, and fourth Pair lived, but did not presently
breed, it not being then their Season of so doing: But in about ten
Days after I put up the fifth Pair, they all spawn’d much about the
time of each other; and in about three Weeks the Spawn came to life.

Of the Spawn and different Gradations of Buggs, I shall now give you an
exact Account.

The Eggs or Nits are white, and having when spawn’d a clammy glutinous
Substance, they flick to any thing spawn’d upon, and by Heat come to
Maturity and Life. The Eggs are oval, and as small as the smallest
Maw-feed.

  Buggs of one day old, are white as Milk.

  At three days old, are Cream-colour’d.

  At one Week old, are Straw-colour’d.

  At two Weeks, are of the same Colour, with a red List down the Back.

  At three Weeks, List Copper Colour.

  At four Weeks, List Browner.

  At five Weeks, List deeper Brown.

  At six Weeks, the Sides brown, and the List hardly discernible.

  At seven Weeks, they come to be of their proper Colour, all over
  brown.

  At eight Weeks, they grow bigger.

  Nine Weeks, Ditto.

  Ten Weeks, Ditto.

  At eleven Weeks, they are full grown.

_Vide_ the Plate done from _Europeans_ bred: under which is a single
one longer and larger, than our full-grown, being a full-grown
_American_ bred. ’Tis needless to give the Gradations of that Species,
because when they spawn and breed here, the Young degenerate, and are
of the _European_ Size.

As I wrote down the Time I put up all Pairs for breeding, and also
the Times they spawn’d, and observ’d and set down the Numbers they
generally spawn’d; I found by my account of above forty Pair so put up
with various Foods, not only their best-beloved Foods, but also their
Method of Breeding; of which, to render my Observations of publick
Service, I shall give you an account.

_Viz._ Their beloved Foods are Blood, dry’d Paste, Size, Deal, Beach,
Osier, and some other Woods, the Sap of which they suck; and on any one
of these will they live the Year round.

Oak, Walnut, Cedar and Mahogoney they will not feed upon; all Pairs I
put up with those Woods for Food, having been soon starved to death.

Wild Buggs are watchful and cunning, and tho’ timorous of us, yet in
fight one with another, are very fierce; I having often seen some (that
I brought up from a day old, always inur’d to Light and Company) fight
as eagerly as Dogs or Cocks, and sometimes one or both have died on the
Spot. From those so brought up tame, I made the greatest Discoveries.

They are hot in Nature, generate often, and shoot their Spawn all at
once, and then leave it, as Fish do.

They generally spawn about fifty at a time, of which Spawn about forty
odd in about three Weeks time usually, (but sometimes two or three days
more or less, according as the Weather proves more or less hot) come
to life; the Residue proving addle, as do often the Eggs of Hens, _&c._

Thus they spawn four times in a Season; _viz._ in _March_, _May_,
_July_, and _September_: by which ’tis apparent to a Demonstration,
that from every Pair that lives out the Season, about two hundred Eggs
or Nits are produc’d; and that out of them, one hundred and sixty, or
one hundred and seventy, come to Life and Perfection.

Some of the first Breed I have known to spawn the same Season they were
hatched; but so few in Quantity, and those so weakly, that the Winter
killed them.

I have also observed that in Rooms where constant Fires have been kept
Night and Day, they have been so brisk and stout as to spawn in the
Depth of Winter: but of all the Spawn I ever saw between _September_
and _March_, not one ever came to Life.

This plainly evinces, that Natural Heat only produces Life in the
Spawn, and that Artificial cannot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus having shewn plainly the Number each Pair annually produce, I hope
their great Increase is so sufficiently accounted for, that it need no
more be wonder’d at.

And having also shewn their seven Months Season of Breeding, if ’tis
admitted, as I think ’tis plainly apparent, that in the other five
Months, _viz._ from _September_ to _March_, when there is no such thing
as Spawn but what is addle, and consequently cannot come to Maturity;
it then naturally follows, that the Winter is the best Season for their
total Destruction: which I shall make more fully appear presently, but
must first refute two vulgar Errors.

The first is, That many People imagine they are dead in Winter. This
is a Notion so absurd, that it would hardly be worth mentioning, had I
not by Experience found it had prevail’d with many People of Sense and
Learning, as well as the Vulgar and Illiterate. The many Experiments
by me shown at the Hospitals in the hardest Frosts last Winter, and in
the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, and to Sir HANS SLOANE the 30th
of _December_ 1729, will, I hope, be deem’d a sufficient Refutation of
that Error: For in the coldest Seasons the Application of my Liquor
with a Feather only, made the Vermin bolt out of their Holes, and die
before their faces.

This they will do all the Year round in the coldest or hottest
Weather. And I have seen, and do assert, they do bite in the cold
as well as hot Seasons: but as our Blood is not so apt to inflame in
Winter as in Summer, their Bites make but little Impression, and are
consequently the less regarded.

The second and most prevailing Error is, That Buggs bite some Persons,
and not others: When in Reality they bite every Human Body that comes
in their way; and this I will undertake plainly to demonstrate by
Reason.

It is generally observ’d and granted, that a Person under an ill Habit
of Body, if he receives a small Cut or Wound, so slight as to be at
first thought a Trifle, such Person’s Wound by reason of such ill Habit
shall be attended with Inflammations and other dangerous Symptons,
and be longer under Cure than Wounds, which when first receiv’d were
larger, and consequently thought more dangerous. These Wounds shall be
immediately healed on Persons in good Habit of Body, such good Habit
preventing any Inflammations.

And as Fevers, and Swellings attending and prolonging the Cure of
Fractures, are accounted for the same way; why may it not by the same
parity of Reason be admitted, that the Bite or Wound of a Bugg should
swell and inflame such only whose Blood is out of order; and tho’ they
do bite, cause no Inflammations on any in right order of Blood?

The best Reason which can be given in support of this Error, is, That
where two Persons lie in one Bed, one shall be apparently bit, the
other not.

Buggs indeed, where there are two Sorts, may feed most on that Blood
which best pleases their Palate; but that they do taste the other
also, to me is apparent: And whenever that Bedfellow who is most
liked by Buggs shall lie from home, the other will so sensibly feel
the effects to be as above, that they will no longer think themselves
bite-free.

Of this I am sensible, that I daily am bit when practising and at work
in my Business, destroying them; and as they never swell me but when
out of order, from thence I infer, that not only myself, but all such
who are among Buggs, and do not swell with their Bites, are certainly
in good Habit of Body. But to return to my Subject.

Having shewn that they not only live in Winter, but asserted that to be
the best Season for their total Destruction, I must further observe,
that few People caring to trouble themselves about Buggs but when they
themselves are troubled by them, having confin’d the Attempts for
their Destruction chiefly to the Breeding-Season, has been the sole
Reason why the best Efforts for their Destruction have fail’d.

I do admit innumerable Quantities have been destroy’d, and much good
has and may be done in Summer: but should every old Bugg then be
destroy’d, you are yet not safe; for the Nits behind Wainscot and in
Walls, which cannot be come at, will by heat come to life, and your
work is partly to be done over again.

Whereas, on the contrary, if cleared out of Spawning-time, there is a
certainty, as there is then no Nits, that their Offspring cannot plague
you thereafter.

’Tis for this Reason I warrant what I do in Winter; which I cannot
pretend to do in Summer.

In Summer indeed I do destroy all Buggs and Nits too in Beds and their
Furniture, but Buggs only behind Wainscot and in Walls: for tho’ my
Liquor has an attractive as well as the destructive Quality, and
thereby does bring out and destroy every live Bugg; yet their Nits
being inanimate, cannot come to the Liquor, nor the Liquor at them.
Such Nits therefore will come to life by heat, and quit the Walls
and Wainscot for better Quarters and Food in the Bed, and so become
troublesome to you.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having thus given, I hope, a satisfactory Account of this nauseous,
venomous Vermin, I shall proceed to shew how they are daily brought to
_England_, and into Houses commonly; then give some necessary Cautions
how to avoid them, and Directions how to destroy them.

As these Insects abound in all foreign Parts, especially in hotter
Climates more than they do here; ’tis on that account all Trading Ships
are so over-run with them, that hardly any one thing, if examin’d, will
be found free.

And as by Shipping they were doubtless first brought to _England_,
so are they now daily brought. This to me is apparent, because not
one Sea-Port in _England_ is free; whereas in Inland-Towns, Buggs are
hardly known.

This Metropolis therefore, as having the greatest Number of Shipping,
has had the greatest Number imported, and consequently bred in it.

You that are free, and would avoid a foreign Supply in your Houses,
examine well all things from on board Ships before you admit them into
Lodging-Rooms. Chests and Casks, Linnens, and Paper, being stiffened
with Paste, afford them Food, and are consequently most dangerous.

If you have occasion to change Servants, let their Boxes, Trunks, _&c._
be well examin’d before carried into your Rooms, lest their coming from
infected Houses should prove dangerous to yours.

Examine well all Furniture that comes in, before you set it up, Beds
especially; which I recommend should be plain, and as free from
Wood-work as possible, and made to draw out, that the Wainscot and
Walls may be better come at, to clear them from Buggs and Dirt.

Deal Head-Boards, and Head-Cloths lined with Deal, or Rails of that
Wood, avoid.

Also Beach-Bedsteds, for all such afford them much Harbour and Food.

If for Ornament you use Lace, let it be sewed, not pasted on, for Paste
they love much.

Oak-Bedsteds, and plain Wainscot Head-Boards, and Tester-Rails of that
Wood, allow them the least Harbour, and no Food; such therefore I
recommend.

If you put out your Linnen to wash, let no Washer-woman’s Basket be
brought into your Houses; for they often prove as dangerous to those
that have no Buggs, as Cradles, and Bugg-Traps made of the same Wood,
often do to those that have them: for the Wood they are made of,
affords them much Convenience of Harbour, and great Nourishment.

Upholsterers are often blamed in Bugg-Affairs; the only Fault I can lay
to their Charge, is their Folly, or rather Inadvertency, in suffering
old Furniture, when they have taken it down, because it was buggy, to
be brought into their Shops or Houses, among new and free Furniture,
to infect them.

Builders are more blameable than they: for in Houses built for Sale,
old Wainscot-Doors, Chimney-Pieces, &c. are oft put up for Cheapness,
painted over, and pass for new; thus the Houses in _Hanover_ and
_Grosvenor-Squares_, _&c._ were supplied before inhabited.

In taking of Houses, new or old, and in buying Bedsteds, Furniture,
_&c._ examine carefully if you can find Bugg-marks. If you find such,
though you see not the Vermin, you may assure yourself they are
nevertheless infected.

       *       *       *       *       *

To such as have, and would destroy them, I shall now proceed to give
full Directions. In order to do it effectually, and to lessen your
trouble, the first necessary thing to be known, is their Marks.

Buggs, tho’ nasty to us, are so cleanly to themselves, that they quit
their places of Harbour to come out and dung, and their Excrements
leave a Mark or Stain like that of a Fly, but somewhat blacker; and
wherever you see such Marks, if on Wood, look for the nearest Crevise,
Knot, or Streak; if on Walls, for the nearest Crack or Hole; if on
Furniture, for the nearest Seam, Lace, Tape, or Fold, and there
assuredly are the Vermin, and there apply the Remedy.

In Winter-time, few, if any, are to be found by day-light in the
Furniture of a Bed; but in the Wood-work, Wainscot, or Walls only.

In the Summer they are all over, and every Lace, Tape, Seam and Fold
must be examin’d, as well as the Crevises, Joints, and Carving in the
Wood-work, for the Marks, and the Remedy applied accordingly.

In Winter-time, though they lie in pretty close Quarters, yet are they
easily destroy’d with any thing that will attract or entice them to it.

If no such thing you have, give me leave to recommend my Liquor; on the
Application of which, at all Seasons of the Year, they will come out,
and immediately die before your Face.

In Summer they lie in more open Quarters, and spread, and then are not
in any measure to be reduced, but by such Liquors as you may safely
touch the Furniture with all over: if none such you have, you may
depend that mine will not stain or any way hurt the richest Velvet,
Silk, or Stuff, not even Scarlet, which almost every thing else will do.

On account of these excellent Qualifications, the Liquor has its Name
of _Nonpareil_, and of this, if minded to do it yourself, you may have
a Bottle for 2 _s._ sufficient for a common Bed, with plain Directions
how to use it effectually.

If the Trouble of doing it your selves be disagreeable to you, you may
have it expeditiously done by me or my Servants, and your Beds, or such
Part as is necessary, taken down and put up again in full as good,
if not better Order, than they were before, and alter’d, (if I see
Opportunity or Occasion) and made to draw out, on my usual easy Terms.

As I have occasionally mention’d what Sort of Beds I would have you
avoid, give me leave to add and assure you, that Beds may be made full
as warm as usual, and very ornamental, and yet be so very handy, as
that any one of your own Servants might take all down and clear them of
Buggs, Dirt, and Dust, and put them up again in a quarter of an Hour;
and to this Fashion most Beds may be alter’d, several Persons having
lately done so by my Directions to their very great Satisfaction.

Those that have a mind to have new Beds thus made, or old ones alter’d,
are to observe, That the Head-posts of the Bedsted are to be no higher
than just to support a Wainscot Head-board, the Tester-lath supports
the Rod as usual; in the Rail are to be nine Holes drilled in, but
not quite thro’; the two at the Head, to take off and hang on, (at
Pleasure,) two Upholders drove into the Wainscot or Wall; in the other
seven, thro’ Eye-let Holes, at proper Distances in the Tester-cloth,
are to be seven Balls or carved Branches to keep the Tester-Cloth
tight; to which the Head-cloth, and inside and outside Vallens are to
be fixed: so that by taking the Lath of the Upholders, and taking
out the Balls, they all come off together; and thus made, may be
commodiously and immediately clear’d, clean’d, and put up again, to
fasten on the Head-board: And keep your Head-cloth down tight in its
Place and Form. You have Hooks and Eyes to take on and off at Pleasure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Persons wanting to be clear’d and kept free of those nauseous venomous
Vermin, shall be attended by the Author on the following Terms, _viz._

  To clear a Bed-sted with Moulding-Tester, Wood Head-Cloth, Head-board
  and its Furniture, 10 _s._ 6 _d._

  Bed-steds with single-rais’d Tester, Moulding, Head-Cloth, Board and
  Furniture, or Chair-beds and Furniture, 8 _s._ each.

  Bed-steds with ditto Tester, plain Head-cloth, cover’d Head-board and
  Furniture; and Field-beds and Furniture, at 7 _s._ each.

  Four-post Bed-steds, or Canopy-beds, with plain Furniture, 6 _s._
  each.

  Press-beds, Chest of Drawers Beds and Bed-steds, without Furniture,
  5 _s._ each.

  Wainscot Walls, Hangings, _&c._ behind and near the Bed-sted are
  clear’d with the Beds at the above Prices: but if spread all over the
  Room and Furniture, then an additional Price is expected.

  For Expedition and Safety, and to prevent Trouble to his Customers,
  or Impositions on them or himself, the Author takes his own Servants
  with him, to take down and put up such Parts of Beds, Wainscot,
  Hangings, _&c._ as he finds necessary; and always puts them up
  in full as good, if not better Order, than he finds them. Of his
  Servants he has good Security, and will be answerable to his
  Customers, for their Fidelity.

  _N. B._ If he any ways damages the Furniture, he will pay for the
  same.

       *       *       *       *       *

Persons about taking Houses, Lodgings, or buying Furniture, paying for
Surveying, shall be attended, and at first View be justly and truly
inform’d if the Premisses be Buggy, or free from Buggs, by

  JOHN SOUTHALL,

  At the _Green-posts_ in the _Green-walk_ near _Faulcon-stairs,
  Southwark_.


_FINIS._

[Illustration]




_Just publish’d_, (_the Fifth Edition of_,)

I. A Dissertation concerning _MISLETOE_: A most wonderful Specifick
Remedy for the Cure of Convulsive Distempers. Calculated for the
Benefit of the Poor as well as the Rich, and heartily recommended
for the Common Good of Mankind. To which is added, A SECOND PART,
containing farther Remarks and Observations. By Sir _JOHN COLBATCH_,
a Member of the College of Physicians. Price 1 _s._ Printed for J.
ROBERTS, in _Warwick-Lane_.



Where may be had,

(_The Second Edition of_,)

II. The Natural History of _CHOCOLATE_: Being a Distinct and Particular
Account of the COCOA-TREE, its Growth and Culture, and the Preparation,
Excellent Properties, and Medicinal Vertues of its Fruit.

Wherein the Errors of those who have wrote upon this Subject are
discover’d; the Best Way of making CHOCOLATE is explain’d, and several
Uncommon MEDICINES drawn from it, are communicated.

Translated from the last EDITION of the _French_, by _R. BROOKES_, M.
D. Price 1 _s._ 6 _d._




_Books lately Published._

I. A Sure Method of Improving Estates, by Plantations of Oak, Elm,
Ash, Beech, and other Timber-Trees, Coppice-Woods, _&c._ Wherein is
demonstrated the Necessity and Advantages thereof; their Manner of
raising, cultivating, felling, _&c._ in all Kinds of Soils, whereby
Estates may be greatly improv’d. By Batty Langley of Twickenham.
Beautifully printed, 8vo. Price 4 _s._

II. The True State of England. Containing the particular Duty,
Business, and Salary of every Officer, Civil and Military, in all
the publick Offices of Great Britain. As also complete Lists of the
Lords and Gentlemen of his Majesty’s most Honourable Privy Council: Of
their Majesties Housholds: Of the Housholds of the Prince of Wales,
and the rest of the Royal Family: And of the great Officers of State,
_&c._ Together with an Account of the Government of the Cities of
London and Westminster; with the Names of the Magistrates, Principal
Officers, _&c._ The Whole in a more Exact and Correct Manner, than any
Performance of this Kind for several Years past. Price 2 _s._ 6 _d._

III. The Works of John Sheffield, Earl of Mulgrave, Marquis of
Normanby, and Duke of Buckingham, in Prose and Verse; with his
Character and Last Will. Adorn’d with Head-Pieces and Tail-Pieces,
neatly engraved. In two Beautiful Volumes, 8vo. Price 12 _s._

  N. B. The Character and Last Will may be had alone. Price 1 _s._

IV. _POMONA_, or the Fruit-Garden Illustrated: Containing sure Methods
for Improving all the best Kinds of Fruits now extant in England.
Calculated from great Variety of Experiments made in all Kinds of Soils
and Aspects: Wherein the Manner of Raising young Stocks, Grafting,
Inoculating, Planting, _&c._ are clearly and fully demonstrated.
With Directions, 1. For Pruning; wherein the Reasons, Manner, and
Consequences thereof are clearly demonstrated. 2. For Nailing; wherein
the true Distances that the Branches of Fruit-Trees are to be laid
upon the Walls, are set forth: Being a most important and useful
Discovery unknown to Gardeners in general. 3. For preserving their
Blossoms from the Injuries of Frosts, Winds, _&c._ 4. Rules for the
Thinning of their young-sett Fruits, so as to leave no more than Nature
can strongly support, and ripen in the greatest Perfection. 5. For
preserving and ordering young Fruits from their Blossoms to the time
of their Maturity. 6. To give them their true Taste and Colour when
fully grown, Season of Ripening, Manner of Gathering, Preserving, _&c._
Likewise several practical Observations on the imbibing Power and
Perspirations of Fruit-Trees; the several Effects of Heat and Moisture
tending to the Growth and Maturity of Fruits. To which is added, a
curious Account of the most valuable Cyder-Fruits of Devonshire. The
whole illustrated with above three hundred Drawings of the several
Fruits, curiously engraven on seventy-nine large Folio Plates. By Batty
Langley of Twickenham. Price 1 _l._ 15 _s._

V. Horace’s Satires, Epistles, and Art of Poetry, done into English,
with Notes, by S. Dunster, D. D. Prebendary of Sarum.

  Sermoni Propiora. Lib. 1. Sat. 4. p. 42.

The Fourth Edition, Corrected. Price 5. _s._

VI. An Essay for a new Translation of the Bible. Wherein is shewn
from Reason and the Authority of the best Commentators, Interpreters,
and Criticks, That there is a Necessity for a new Translation. In two
Parts. The second Edition corrected. To which is added, a Table of the
Texts of Scripture contained in both Parts.

Audendum est ut illustrata Veritas pateat, multique ab Errore
liberentur. Lact. Instit. Div. L. 4. C. 5. Price. 4 _s._ 6. _d._

VII. The History of the Principal Discoveries and Improvements, in the
several Arts and Sciences: Particularly the Great Branches of Commerce,
Navigation, and Plantation, in all Parts of the known World, 8vo.
Price. 4 _s._


All Printed for D. BROWNE, without _Temple-Bar_.




Transcriber's Note


On p. 28, "seeond" has been changed to "second".

The book was printed using the "long s" (ſ), which has been replaced
by a modern "s" in this transcription. Inconsistent or archaic
spelling and punctuation have otherwise been kept as printed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE OF BUGGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


