The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mentor: The Mediterranean, Vol. 1, Num. 39, Serial No. 39, November 10, 1913
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mentor: The Mediterranean, Vol. 1, Num. 39, Serial No. 39, November 10, 1913

Author: Dwight L. Elmendorf

Release date: August 29, 2015 [eBook #49816]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE MEDITERRANEAN, VOL. 1, NUM. 39, SERIAL NO. 39, NOVEMBER 10, 1913 ***

The Mentor 1913.11.10, No. 39, The Mediterranean




                            LEARN ONE THING
                               EVERY DAY

                NOVEMBER 10 1913          SERIAL NO. 39

                                  THE
                                MENTOR

                                  THE
                             MEDITERRANEAN

                        By DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF

                         Lecturer and Traveler

                DEPARTMENT OF                  VOLUME 1
                TRAVEL                        NUMBER 39

                          TWENTY CENTS A COPY




THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL

CONTRIBUTORS--PROF. JOHN C. VAN DYKE, HAMILTON W. MABIE, PROF. ALBERT
BUSHNELL HART, REAR ADMIRAL ROBERT E. PEARY, WILLIAM T. HORNADAY,
DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF, HENRY T. FINCK, WILLIAM WINTER, ESTHER SINGLETON,
PROF. G. W. BOTSFORD, IDA M. TARBELL, GUSTAV KOBBÉ, DEAN C. WORCESTER;
JOHN K. MUMFORD, W. J. HOLLAND, LORADO TAFT, KENYON COX, E. H. FORBUSH,
H. E. KREHBIEL, SAMUEL ISHAM, BURGES JOHNSON, STEPHEN BONSAL, JAMES
HUNEKER, W. J. HENDERSON, AND OTHERS.

THE PLAN OF THE ASSOCIATION

The purpose of The Mentor Association is to give its members, in an
interesting and attractive way the information in various fields of
knowledge which everybody wants and ought to have. The information is
imparted by interesting reading matter, prepared under the direction of
leading authorities, and by beautiful pictures, reproduced by the most
highly perfected modern processes.

The object of The Mentor Association is to enable people to acquire
useful knowledge without effort, so that they may come easily
and agreeably to know the world’s great men and women, the great
achievements and the permanently interesting things in art, literature,
science, history, nature and travel.

The purpose of the Association is carried out by means of simple
readable text and beautiful illustrations in The Mentor.

The annual subscription is Four Dollars, covering The Mentor Course,
which comprises twenty-four numbers of The Mentor in one year.

THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75 CENTS EXTRA.
CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS. PRESIDENT,
THOMAS H. BECK; VICE-PRESIDENT, WALTER P. TEN EYCK; SECRETARY, W. D.
MOFFAT; TREASURER, ROBERT M. DONALDSON; ASST. TREASURER AND ASST.
SECRETARY, J. S. CAMPBELL

_Copyright, 1913, by The Mentor Association, Inc. Entered as
second-class matter March 10, 1913, at the post office at New York,
N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879._




THE MENTOR

SERIAL NUMBER 39

[Illustration]

THE MEDITERRANEAN

BY

DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF

_Lecturer and Traveler_

ALGIERS · THE RIVIERA · MONTE CARLO · NICE · GENOA · NAPLES


Across the straits from Gibraltar is another and very different world.
Start with Tangier (tahn-jeer´) and wander along the Barbary coast,
and you will find yourself in such contrasting conditions, and in a
civilization so different from those north of you in Spain and in
France, that it will be hard for you to believe that you are separated
from those countries by distances varying from the narrow straits of
Gibraltar to a mere matter of two or three hundred miles.

You will seem to have been transported to the other side of the world.
No traveler can find greater variety in scene and life, in language
and habit, in climate and condition, than he gets in the course of
a full Mediterranean tour. Few travelers make the whole circuit of
the Mediterranean. This great inland sea is usually visited only in
parts, and while the traveler is in transit from one point to another.
There is no general description that can apply to the whole of this
interesting body of water. On every shore there is something that is
new and different, and somewhere on these shores there is something
to delight each one. If scenery is desired, the French and Italian
Riviera (ree-vee-ay´-rah) will draw one irresistibly. A life full of
gaiety will hold him there. If historic associations interest him, he
will turn naturally to the shores of Italy and Greece, and he will
spend months pleasantly in the Adriatic or Ægean Sea. There is in those
countries an endless amount to learn and a wealth of natural beauty.
When you have cruised through the Ægean (ee-jee´-an), visit the coast
of Greece, and of Asia Minor. There you will know the feelings that
stirred Lord Byron when he wrote:

    “Fair clime! where every season smiles
    Benignant o’er those blessed isles,
    Which seen from far Colonna’s height,
    Make glad the heart that hails the sight,
    And lend to loneliness, delight.”

The Mediterranean has been the arena of the world’s history for several
thousand years.

[Illustration: ALGIERS

_A street scene in Algiers near the mosque._]


THE MEDITERRANEAN TRIP

As your eye traces the coast line on the map and you note the countries
whose shores are washed by the Mediterranean, you realize what a trip
throughout that sea must mean in instruction as well as in delights
of travel. Besides the countries I have named, there are Turkey, Asia
Minor, Palestine, and Egypt, to say nothing of the great stretch on the
African coast. The shore line is so extended, and the life and customs
at different points vary so, that we think of the Mediterranean as not
one thing, but many things. What is usually called a “Mediterranean
trip” rarely comprises more than ten or fifteen points. With limited
time, the traveler naturally selects the points of which he has heard
most.


ALGIERS

[Illustration: ALGIERS

_A scene near the busy market._]

A Mediterranean trip to many travelers means Algiers (al-jeerz´), as
far as the African coast is concerned, and the Riviera, with all the
points on that beautiful north shore line. Then they must see Naples,
of course, and after passing down the Italian coast they are likely to
go straight on to Egypt. After passing through the straits of Gibraltar
the attention of the traveler is soon centered on Algiers.

From the entrance to the harbor Algiers appears like a white diamond
set in a circle of emeralds. The town consists of two parts, the French
and the Arab quarters. To the visitor from the west Algiers is most
interesting; for there he meets characters of all kinds, European
peoples mixing with those of North Africa. The French quarters show
that the Frenchman, when compelled to live in another country, takes a
bit of Paris with him; for there is found the typical French café, with
its little tables on the sidewalk, contrasting with the Arab café where
natives, in their picturesque white costumes, sit and sip their coffee
and gossip with wild gesticulation. Even in its African population
Algiers is oddly mixed. Each tribe has its own peculiar costume, the
marketplace often looking like a stage of a comic opera, only much more
artistic and natural.

[Illustration: MOSQUÉE DE LA PÊCHERIE, ALGIERS

_The “Mosque of the Fishery” was erected by Turkish architects in 1660.
It is a cruciform building, with a large central dome painted inside,
and a square minaret, now a clock tower._]

[Illustration: TOMBEAU DE LA CHRÉTIENNE

_This large tomb near Algiers, 108 feet high, was built as a tomb
for Juba II and his family. It serves as a landmark for sailors.
Its present name is derived from the cruciform moldings of the door
panels._]

The government house, and in fact all the buildings except those in
the French quarters, are Moorish in design and generally whitewashed,
so that they masquerade as glittering white marble. The town is
beautifully situated, and is surrounded by a very interesting country
filled with relics of Punic War times, and ruins of structures of even
a more remote period. Near Algiers is the building called the “tomb of
the Christian woman.” This is really the tomb of Juba II, who married
Cleopatra Selene (se-lee´-nee), daughter of the celebrated Cleopatra
and of Marc Antony. Juba II had a son, Ptolemy, and a daughter,
Drusilla, who was the wife of Felix, procurator of Judea, who, it will
be remembered, said to Saint Paul, “Go thy way for this time; when I
have a convenient season, I will call for thee” (Acts xxiv, 25).

[Illustration: A STREET SCENE IN ALGIERS

_Showing three different styles of costume._]

All the coast about Algiers is filled with just such interesting relics
of Biblical times. Perfect French roads now make it possible to reach
the most interesting places by carriage or motorcar.


THE RIVIERA

Across the Mediterranean is a stretch of shore that no traveler in
Europe should miss. It is called “The Riviera,” and it extends from
Cannes (kahn) to Ventimiglia (ven-tee-meel´-yah), thence to Spezia
(spet´-see-ah), beyond Genoa (jen´-o-ah); the former section French,
the latter Italian. From one end to the other is a chain of health
resorts, some most fashionable, others the very opposite; the latter on
that account more desirable to those who wish peace and quiet. Even in
the most retired spots, however, there is no escape from the honk-honk
of the motorcars; for Riviera highways are the favorite touring roads
of southern Europe.

[Illustration: LOOKING TOWARD MENTONE

_Mentone belonged to Monaco until 1861. It is beautifully situated
on the Golfe de la Paix, consisting of two bays separated by a rocky
promontory._]

Beginning at Cannes, the necklace of the sea contains such
jewels as Antibes (ong-teeb´), Nice (nees), Villefranche-sur-Mer
(veel-frongsh-soor-mare´), Beaulieu (bo-lee-eh´), Monaco (mon´-ah-ko),
Monte Carlo, and Mentone (men-to´-ne). These are followed by the
Italian section,--Ventimiglia, Bordighera (bor-dee-gay´-rah),
Ospedaletti, San Remo (ray´-mo), Alassio (ah-lahs´-see-o), Savona
(sah-vo´-nah), Pegli (pel´-yee), and Genoa. This section is called
the Riviera di Ponente (po-nen´-teh), followed by Riviera di Levante
(le-vahn´-te) to the east of Genoa,--Nervi (ner´-vee), Recco (rek´-ko),
Santa Margherita Ligure (lih-goor´-eh), Rapallo (rah-pahl´-lo), Sestri
Levante, and Spezia.

The French section is more fully developed, and therefore more
comfortable and fashionable. The Italian section, while beautiful,
leaves much to be desired by the ordinary tourist.

There nestles in the southeast corner of France a tiny little
principality called Monaco, the most remarkable place of its kind in
the world.


MONTE CARLO

[Illustration: MONTE CARLO

_The front of the Casino._]

[Illustration: MONACO

_The palace of the Prince of Monaco, and in the background the “Tête de
Chien” or “Dog’s Head Mountain.”_]

It is only about eight square miles in area, and contains nineteen
thousand inhabitants. Strange as it may seem, there are no taxes there,
as the Société des Bains de Mer, which is simply a name for the society
or company that runs the Casino gambling tables at Monte Carlo, pays
the tribute. From the millions of francs paid by this society to the
Prince of Monaco and his government every year, the natural inference
is that most of the visitors to Monte Carlo get nothing except
experience.

The Casino building is very theatrical in style, built expressly for
its purpose, and superbly placed on a promontory overlooking the sea
and town. It is surrounded by beautiful gardens, carefully kept. In
fact, the whole place is a delight to the eye and the most beautiful
spot on the Riviera. It is attractive enough to detain one for days,
even if the great magnet, the Casino, were not there. On account of
the gaming, the whole district is filled with characters that one had
rather not meet except in the Casino, where perfect order is assured by
the presence of numerous detectives, ready to check disorder when it
threatens, or to notify politely anyone of suicidal tendency to leave
the Casino and the principality. There is no place in the world where
arrangements are so well planned to satisfy the desire of human beings
to get something for nothing. And it is not simply a gaming place. The
spectacle of Monte Carlo has a great fascination even for those who
never play at the tables, everything is so beautiful, so orderly, and
so well kept. Many who visit there prefer, however, to stop at Mentone,
which is but a few minutes distant by trolley or motorcar.

[Illustration: THE CASINO, MONTE CARLO

_One of the beautiful gaming rooms, the “Salle du Trente-Quarante.”_]


NICE

The Nicæa (ny-see´-a) of ancient times, founded by Massilians in the
fifth century B.C., Nice is the birthplace of Masséna (mah-say-nah´)
and Garibaldi, (gah-ree-bahl´-dee). Sheltered by the Maritime Alps,
and because of the great limestone cliffs along shore, which absorb
the heat rays of the sun, the temperature is so modified that flowers
bloom the year round. Nice and its near neighbors have become a famous
resort for invalids, especially of the English, who flee to this part
of the world to escape their own disagreeable winter. In summer the
temperature is fifteen to twenty degrees lower than Paris. The best
view of the town is obtained from Castle Hill, overlooking the shore of
the Promenade des Anglais, constructed by the English in 1822, in order
to give work to the unemployed. One of the secrets of the great success
of Nice as a resort is the great variety of entertainment offered by
the clever Frenchmen. Fine hotels, theaters, casinos, promenades, and
roads (the best in the world), especially the Petite and the Grand
Corniche (kor-neesh´), together with a superb climate, are quite enough
to attract people from all parts of the world. The business part of the
town is a miniature Paris. Fine avenues, lined with shops filled with
all kinds of attractive things, inveigle the tourist into extravagant
expenditure; while casinos and gambling places relieve the venturesome
of their spare cash most politely.

[Illustration: THE CASINO, MONTE CARLO

_The richly decorated “Salon de Conversation.”_]


GENOA

[Illustration: NICE

_The town and the promenade from Castle Hill._]

[Illustration: NICE

_Nice is a superb winter resort. In the summer it is less frequented._]

From being a republic and a great naval power in the Middle Ages, and
as such a rival of Venice, Genoa has come to be now a city of great
enterprise and activity. It stands next to Marseilles (mahr-saylz´) in
importance as a seaport. It is advantageously situated, the Gulf of
Genoa affording an attractive harbor, and the slopes of the Ligurian
hills at the back offering many spots of advantage for the display of
the city’s beautiful buildings.

The city is finely constructed. As you enter the harbor you find
just before you that part of the lower town that is on the level of
the water. Beyond that and up the hillslopes beautiful structures
have assembled themselves on the different levels of a great natural
theater, as if to watch your coming and to greet you on your arrival.

[Illustration: THE RAILWAY STATION, GENOA]

On landing at the pier the traveler quickly finds himself in the
attractive Palazzo Doria, named after Andrea Doria, (do´-ree-ah) the
famous admiral of Charles V. It is well for the visitor, especially
if an American, to take this course, following up the Via Doria to
the square in front of the railway station; for there, surrounded by
flowers and palms, stands a fine monument of Christopher Columbus;
who, it will be remembered, was a native of the city. Genoa is full of
stirring activity. If you have gone there from some of the quieter
towns along the Riviera, you will feel a change in spirit. You are
inclined to move a little faster. Things are happening all the time.
There is much to be seen, and all that you see tells a story of years
of vigorous, successful civic life. The most notable physical features
of Genoa are its fine medieval churches and its many splendid sixteenth
century palaces.

[Illustration: GENOA

_Houses in the old town near the port. The old town is a network
of narrow and steep streets; but the newer quarters have broad and
straight thoroughfares._]

[Illustration: CAMPO SANTO, GENOA

_This cemetery was laid out by Resasco in 1844-51. The central point is
a rotunda, with a dome borne by columns of black marble._]

Follow up the Via Garibaldi, a magnificent street with many beautiful
palaces on both sides. To vary the impressions of fine architectural
display take a ride in the tramway up to San Nicolo (nee-ko-lo´) and
Castellaccio (cahs-tel-ah´-cho), where you will find yourself over
a thousand feet high, and commanding a superb view of the Bisagno
(bih-sahn´-yo) Valley and the Campo Santo (kahm´-po sahn´-to) below
you. The cemetery called Campo Santo is one of the most interesting
features of Genoa. It is beautifully situated, and is filled with
remarkable monuments, some of them executed by the leading sculptors
of Italy. In the burial spots of the Genoese, as well as in the homes
where they live, there is much of luxury and elegance. In its business
activities, its social life, its climate, and its customs, Genoa is
attractive, and holds the visitor there for sometime content.


NAPLES

On the most beautiful site in Europe stands Naples, the Neapolis
of the Athenian colonists. After the Romans conquered it, it still
retained Greek culture and institutions. It became the favorite summer
resort of the Romans, and the delight of the poets Horace, Ovid, and
Virgil. It was when living in Naples that Virgil wrote his famous
verses on agriculture, the “Georgics.” After many vicissitudes Roger de
Hauteville formed the kingdom of Naples in 1130.

Medieval Naples is traceable in its walls and great gates. The Porta
Capuana is one of the best preserved.

[Illustration: NAPLES

_The market street in the old quarter._]

After the young Conradin (kon´-rah-deen), the last of the Norman
dynasty in Naples, was executed, the country was ruled by the house of
Anjou (English, an´-jo; French, ong-zho´), then by the French (Louis
XII), and then by Ferdinand of Spain. Don Carlos improved the city
and surrounding country. In 1806 the city was invaded by Napoleon,
who established his government there for a short time. The Bourbon
(boor-bong´) rule came to an end in 1860, when Frances II was dethroned
by Garibaldi. From the time it was founded till the present day poor
Naples has been so torn to pieces by the many nations contesting for
it that there is but little left of its ancient beauty or grandeur,
and it now depends upon its wonderful situation, which, with the
beautiful places about it, holds the visitor enchanted.


THE BEAUTY OF NAPLES

[Illustration: PORTA CAPUANA, NAPLES

_Capua Gate, one of the finest of Renaissance gateways, was built by
the Florentine Giuliano da Maiano, with sculptures by Giovanni da
Nola._]

There are travelers of years of experience who have declared that
the site and surroundings of Naples are not excelled in beauty
anywhere in the world. You enter the Bay of Naples with the island of
Ischia (es´-kee-ah) on one side and on the other the island of Capri
(kah´-pree). Immediately before you lies Naples, stretching out from
the water’s edge up the hills beyond; the second largest city in Italy,
with a population of over five hundred thousand. Back of it and to the
southeast is Vesuvius. History has taught us to look with feelings of
respect and awe upon that smoke-crowned cone. On the shore, to the
south, Herculaneum (her-kew-lay´-nee-um) and Pompeii (pom-pay´-yee)
are to be seen, and as the coast curves out to the peninsula you come
to Sorrento (sore-ren´-to) and the road along the mountainside that
takes you on a scenic tour of matchless beauty, including Amalfi
(ah-mahl´-fee), Vietri (vee-ay´-tree), and Salerno (sah-ler´-no).

The interest in Naples is not only scenic, but historic. It is not the
achievements of monarchs nor the monuments of artists that attract you.
In such matters Naples is poorer than other towns in Italy. But the
relics rescued from the explorations in Herculaneum and Pompeii afford
an interest that is unique and compelling--an interest, too, that is
continually growing, for new discoveries are being made from time to
time.

Many are the scenic trips to be taken from Naples. It is a point
of departure for pleasure tourists in almost every direction. The
ascent of Mount Vesuvius is interesting; but that is the interest of
curiosity. Where visitors find the greatest happiness is in the trips
to outlying points, especially to the peninsula of Sorrento, to the
island of Capri, and to Amalfi and Ravello. It is at these points that
we find the greatest beauty of the Mediterranean. It seems indeed as if
the great inland sea and mankind had joined there to make a pleasure
ground beyond compare.

It is in and about Naples that the traveler will care to linger
longest. There is so much to be seen there--and, when satisfied
with pleasure jaunts and scenic trips, there is a serenity of life
in Naples, and a soft, sunny climate that, to repeat Byron’s words,
“lend to loneliness delight.” One friend of mine prolonged a trip,
planned for a week, until it filled out twelve months. There is much to
interest and delight one in all the seaport towns of the Mediterranean.
After all has been said of its varied shores, however, one is apt to
conclude by giving the palm of distinction in beauty and interest to
Algiers, to Monte Carlo, and to Naples with its environs.

[Illustration: NAPLES FROM THE BAY]

    SUPPLEMENTARY READING--“Mediterranean Winter Resorts,” E.
    Reynolds-Ball; “Algeria and Tunis,” Frances E. Nesbitt; “The
    Barbary Coast,” H. M. Field; “The Garden of Allah,” R. S.
    Hichens; “Servitude,” Irene Osgood; Burckhardt’s “Cicerone,”
    translated by Mrs. A. H. Clough; “Afloat and Ashore on the
    Mediterranean,” Lee Meriwether; “Mediterranean Trip,” N.
    Brooks; “Italian Cities,” E. H. and E. W. Blashfield.




THE MENTOR

ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY BY

The Mentor Association, Inc.

381 Fourth Ave., New York, N. Y.

    Vol. 1      No. 39

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS. FOREIGN
POSTAGE, SEVENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE, FIFTY CENTS EXTRA.
ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK, N. Y., AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER.


_Editorial_

The Mentor has reached the farm. We have heard of its work in cities
and towns and small settlements. We have had assurance of its
acceptance by professional men, business men, educators, reading
societies and of the place it has assumed in the home. We have been
waiting to hear from the farm--and wanting to hear, for it seems to us
that a plan that carries information in a popular and interesting way
to the public must be a welcome visitor to any intelligent farm family.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now comes the first voice from the farm, and it is in its way the
finest, freshest, and cheeriest message that we have had. It is so full
of simon-pure human notes that we are going to give it to the readers
of The Mentor in full. We are sure it will interest all of our readers
as much as it gratifies us:

“The Mentor Association, Inc., New York City.

“Dear Sirs: Thank you so much for your offer for becoming a charter
member. I think The Mentor is splendid and I desire most keenly to
accept, but alas, I am poor. My husband and I are young and struggling
farmers. We are in a way of becoming comfortably situated, but at
present, though we own quite a bunch of stock, implements, some
property, etc., we really have little actual cash, and have to plan
with economy and care to make every penny count. The grain in the bins
means money, but must pay for labor and other expenses until another
crop is harvested next year. The cream from the cows pays for food and
clothing and incidentals.

       *       *       *       *       *

“I have decided to save my dimes for The Mentor, and to forego a
renewal of one of my magazines. My husband spends some of his dimes
for tobacco; I will save mine for The Mentor, even if it takes fifty,
and share my joy with him. When I read the list of previous numbers, I
longed for a complete set; but I am of a cheerful disposition, so am
consoling myself in thinking _I will_ some time have some of them. Best
wishes to you in your great plan, and many thanks also for the two blue
coupons for my friends.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We have always claimed for The Mentor a “wide human reach.” Surely it
must have it when a single number can bring a message like this back to
us from a far western farm.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now a word about the blue coupons. They are Mentor Presentation
Coupons, and they have been prepared for the use of members of The
Mentor Association. We believe that every member of The Mentor
Association has many friends who would be delighted to know The Mentor,
and to become acquainted with the advantages which the Association
affords. In this busy work-a-day world people are often too busy to
pass on a good thing to their friends. Sometimes it is not because
they are too busy; it is simply because there is no convenient way of
passing on the information. Some of our readers have told us that if we
would supply them with convenient material for making The Mentor known
to others it would be appreciated and used.

       *       *       *       *       *

So we have prepared the blue coupon specially with the thought of
interesting your friends. Send to us for some of these coupons. They
will enable you to place free copies of The Mentor with friends that
you think will appreciate them. You enjoy The Mentor. Give your friends
a chance to enjoy it too.




[Illustration: ALGIERS, ALGERIA]




    ALGIERS, ALGERIA, formerly a nest of pirates, but now a fine,
    modernized city in possession of the French, is the subject
    of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating “The
    Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number One in The Mentor Reading Course

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ALGIERS, ALGERIA


Less than a century ago the Barbary Coast, and the city of Algiers in
particular, was a nest of pirates. All the principal nations of the
world paid them tribute. Their nation was known as the “scourge of
Christendom.” Up to the year 1800 the United States alone had poured
over $2,000,000 into the coffers of the dey, or ruler. But it was our
country, the youngest of all, that put a stop to this cowardly practice
of paying toll for immunity from attack on the high seas.

In 1800 Captain Bainbridge, in a United States warship, went to
Algiers, taking the usual “presents.”

The dey commanded him to become his messenger and carry his despatches
to Constantinople. “The English, French, and Spanish captains have
always done this for me. You also pay me tribute, and you also are my
slaves,” he said insultingly.

Not daring to disobey without orders from home, Bainbridge did as he
commanded; but this was too much for the American people. After the War
of 1812 Commodore Decatur served notice on the dey that never again
would the United States pay him tribute in money. The dey replied that
some powder for his fleet would be acceptable.

“The powder you shall have, if you insist,” answered Decatur; “but the
bullets go with it.”

The dey refused the present; but ordered his ships to destroy all
American shipping hereafter. These orders having been carried out,
Commodore Decatur sailed again for Algiers, and forced the terrified
dey to sign a treaty which gave to American ships immunity forever
after.

In 1816 the English attacked Algiers; but it was not until fourteen
years later that the pirates’ nest was destroyed for good. On June 13,
1830, the dey of Algiers slapped the French consul in the face, and
brought down upon himself the wrath of France in the shape of an army
of forty thousand men. On the fourth of July, Algiers surrendered, and
the “scourge of Christendom” was ended.

Algiers, the French capital of Algeria, has 154,000 inhabitants. It
is located on the west side of the Bay of Algiers, and is the most
important coaling station on the whole coast of northern Africa.

In Roman times the famous Biblical town of Cæsarea occupied almost the
same site. The present city was founded about 935; but Algiers was of
little importance until after the expulsion of the Moors from Spain,
many of whom settled in the city. From then on until its capture by
France, Algiers was the chief seat of the Barbary pirates. The French
have greatly improved the place.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: RAPALLO, ITALY]




    RAPALLO ON THE RIVIERA, an extremely beautiful stretch of shore
    which extends along the Mediterranean Sea, is the subject
    of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating “The
    Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number Two in The Mentor Reading Course

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

THE RIVIERA


The Riviera is a narrow belt of coast that lies between the mountains
and the sea all round the Gulf of Genoa in the north of Italy,
extending from Nice on the west to Spezia on the east. Part of the
Riviera is in France and part in Italy. The Riviera di Ponente (“the
coast of the setting sun”) lies between Nice and Genoa. The part
between Genoa and Spezia is called the Riviera di Levante (“the coast
of the rising sun”).

The climate of the Riviera is very mild, and it is one of the most
beautiful regions on earth. All this district is open to the south and
sheltered by the mountains on the north and east. The landscape is
delightfully varied,--here a bold and lofty promontory, there a wooded
hill, and down near the coast richly cultivated plains. The traveler
passes steep and frowning cliffs, whose bases are washed by the surf of
the Mediterranean, whose summits are crowned by the venerable ruins of
towers erected in bygone ages for protection against pirates.

Many of the towns in the Riviera are situated in fertile valleys or
on picturesque hills; while others are perched like nests among the
rocks. Little churches and chapels peering from the somber foliage
of cypresses, and gigantic gray pinnacles of rock frowning upon the
smiling plains, frequently enhance the charms of the scenery; while the
vast expanse of the Mediterranean, with its ever changing hues, dazzles
the eye with its beauty.

Olives, with their grotesque and gnarled stems, are grown on great
plantations in the Riviera. The warm climate produces luxuriant growths
of figs, vines, citrons, oranges, oleanders, myrtles, and aloes. Bright
green pine forests meet the eye, and even palms are seen occasionally.

Thousands of visitors spend the winter in the chain of towns
and villages that stretches from one end of the Riviera to the
other,--Nice; Monte Carlo in Monaco, the little independent
principality; Mentone, the last town in the French Riviera; Bordighera;
Pegli; Nervi; Spezia; and many others. In summer the Italians visit
these resorts for sea bathing.

The only drawback to the Riviera is its liability to earthquakes, of
which there were four in the last century alone.

A railway runs close along the shore all through the Riviera. The
distance from Nice to Genoa is 116 miles, and from Genoa to Spezia 56
miles. In the latter stretch the railroad burrows through the many
projecting headlands by means of more than 80 tunnels.

The poets Lord Byron and Shelley both lived and wrote on the shores of
the Gulf of Spezia, and Charles Dickens, the great English novelist,
wrote his well known story, “The Chimes,” at Genoa.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: CASINO, MONTE CARLO]




    MONTE CARLO CASINO, a famous spot in the smallest independent
    country in the entire continent of Europe, is the subject
    of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating “The
    Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number Three in The Mentor Reading Course.

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

MONTE CARLO, MONACO


It is a curious thing that the smallest country in Europe is also one
of the most visited. This is the little independent principality of
Monaco. Monaco is only about eight square miles in area; and it is two
and a quarter miles long. The population of the entire principality is
only 19,000.

Monaco--the city of Monte Carlo in particular--is so greatly visited
for two reasons,--its charming climate and situation, and its gaming
tables. It is an excellent health resort, but is world famous as a
gambling place. It was in 1861 that a man named François Blanc obtained
a gambling concession in Monaco for fifty years from Charles III. A
stock company later got hold of this concession, and in 1898 it was
extended to 1947, in return for a payment to the prince of $2,000,000
in 1899 and another payment of $3,000,000 in 1913. In addition to
this Monaco obtains from the company an annual tribute of $350,000,
increasing to $400,000 in 1917, $450,000 in 1927, and $500,000 in 1937.
These great tributes make it possible for the inhabitants of Monaco to
be entirely exempt from taxation.

In the principality of Monaco there are three cities,--Monaco the
capital, Condamine, and Monte Carlo. At one time the towns of Mentone
and Roquebrune belonged to Monaco; but they were ceded to France in
1861 for $800,000. The city of Monaco occupies the level summit of a
rocky headland, rising about 200 feet from the shore. Here the prince
has his palace.

Monte Carlo lies to the north of the Bay of Monaco, where are gathered
the various buildings of the Casino of Monte Carlo, with the beautiful
gardens, and many villas and hotels.

The history of this little principality is an interesting one. It seems
that long ago a temple of Heracles was built on the Monaco headland
by the Phoenicians. The same god was worshiped there by the Greeks at
a later date, and they gave the place its name. The Grimaldis, the
present ruling family of Monaco, became associated with the place in
the tenth century; but they did not come into permanent possession
until much later.

Monaco in the fourteenth century was notorious for its piracies, and
the right to exact toll from vessels passing the port continued to be
exercised until the end of the eighteenth century.

For many years Monaco was an ally of France; but in 1525 it came under
the protection of Spain. Then in 1641 Honoré II threw off the Spanish
yoke and made himself an ally of France. The National Convention
annexed the principality to France in 1793; but by the Treaty of Paris
in 1814 it was restored to the Grimaldis. Finally in 1860 Monaco passed
again under French protection.

The present ruler of Monaco, Prince Albert, was born in 1848 and
succeeded his father, Prince Charles III, in 1889. The prince is
absolute ruler, as there is no parliament in the principality. He
appoints a small council to advise him on matters of state. He also has
power to appoint the mayors and other municipal authorities.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: NICE, FRANCE]




    NICE, FRANCE, a very ancient and charmingly beautiful town,
    is the subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures
    illustrating “The Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number Four in The Mentor Reading Course

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

NICE, FRANCE


The Massilians founded Nice 2,500 years ago. Its situation soon made
it one of the busiest trading stations on the Ligurian coast. But in
those days the price of prosperity was continual warfare. The Saracens
descended on Nice in 729; and though at that time they were repulsed,
in the next century they captured the city and burned it.

All through the Middle Ages, Nice had its share in the wars and
disasters of Italy. It had to fight both Genoa and France, and on the
sea its merchantmen were attacked by Barbary pirates. Finally in 1388
it placed itself under the protection of the counts of Savoy. In this
way it was protected on land and could devote its strength to taking
care of the pirates.

But bad fortune seemed to hover over the city. Invading armies
devastated the land, and then pestilence and famine raged for several
years. In 1543 Nice was attacked by the united forces of Francis I
and Barbarossa. After a brave resistance the city was compelled to
surrender, and was pillaged by the conquerors.

Then followed many years of alternate war and peace; until finally Nice
was captured in 1792 by the armies of the French republic. It continued
to be a part of France till 1814; but at that time it reverted to
Sardinia. Then, in 1860, by a treaty between the Sardinian king and
Napoleon III, it was again transferred to France, in whose possession
it is today.

The city of Nice is a great winter resort for invalids and others from
all parts of Europe. It is situated on the Mediterranean 100 miles east
of Marseilles. A steep limestone hill, 308 feet in height, running
back for some distance from the shore, is the historical nucleus of
the town. It used to be crowned by a castle, which, previous to its
destruction by the Duke of Berwick in 1706, was one of the strongest
fortresses on the coast. Now it is a public pleasure ground.

Nice is a great commercial town. Grapes, olives, oranges, and
mulberries are grown profusely, and in the city there are perfumery
factories, oilworks, furniture factories, confectionery works, a
national tobacco factory, and many others.

For the comfort and entertainment of visitors every provision is made.
Autumn is the best season. Nice is at its liveliest during the carnival
festivities. In these carnivals battles are waged with sweetmeats and
flowers.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: GENOA, ITALY]




    GENOA, ITALY, a busy center of modern enterprise and activity,
    is the subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures
    illustrating “The Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number Five in The Mentor Reading Course

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

GENOA, ITALY


“Seas without fish, mountains without trees, men without honesty, women
without modesty,”--that was what her enemies said about the republic of
Genoa in olden times. And historians seem to agree that the character
of the Genoese in those days was not of the best. All their energy
was concentrated on commerce and the pursuit of money. They took no
interest in art nor in any of the intellectual development of Italy
during the Middle Ages. But these bad traits of the Genoese have all
disappeared.

The city of Genoa now has 275,000 inhabitants, and is the seat of a
university and an archbishop. It is the headquarters of the fourth
Italian army corps, and is a strong fortress, as well as being the
chief commercial town in Italy.

Genoa, with its many beautiful palaces, rising above the sea in a wide
half-circle, is called “La Superba” (the superb). The old town is a
network of narrow and steep streets, lined with many-storied buildings;
but the newer part of the city has broad and straight thoroughfares.

In the seventeenth century the Genoese built as a protection against
their enemies a rampart over nine miles long. They also erected on the
heights around the town ten detached forts.

From the earliest times Genoa has been famous as a seaport. Today it
still possesses its great mercantile supremacy, and in addition is
an important emigration harbor. Far back in 400 B. C. its trade with
the Greeks, Etruscans, and Celts was large, and as time went on it
increased greatly.

In the Middle Ages the little rival Italian states were constantly at
war with one another. Genoa had a war with Pisa, and in 1284 shattered
the power of that city forever in a terrible naval battle at Meloria.
Then came the struggle with Venice which ended in the defeat of Genoa
at the battle of Chioggia in 1380.

The city of Genoa was also filled with internal political strife. Two
or three different factions were continually fighting with one another,
and this finally led to Genoa’s being always under the rule of some
foreign prince. Finally in 1797 the aristocratic government of Genoa
was superseded by the democratic Ligurian Republic, established by
Napoleon, and in 1805 Liguria was formally annexed to the empire of
France. Ten years later it was annexed to the kingdom of Sardinia.

Giuseppe Mazzini, the patriotic writer, was born at Genoa in 1805, and
Garibaldi, the great Italian patriot and leader, with whom he worked,
though born at Nice in 1807, was the son of a Genoese of Chiavari.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: NAPLES, ITALY]




    NAPLES, ITALY, which is considered by many people to be the
    most beautifully situated city in Europe, is the subject
    of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating “The
    Mediterranean.”

Monograph Number Six in The Mentor Reading Course

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

NAPLES, ITALY


Naples, the most important seaport in Italy, is also its largest city.
In addition to this it is one of the most beautifully situated cities
in the world.

The ancient Greeks founded Naples away back in olden times. They came
from Cumæ and founded a city which they named Parthenope. Afterward
this was divided into Palacopolis, the “old town,” and Neapolis, the
“new town.” It was from the second that Naples got its name.

Later many other nations came into possession of the city,--Ostrogoths,
Byzantines, and Normans. At one time Charles of Anjou made Naples his
capital. Ferdinand I of Aragon, the Spanish viceroy, Don Pedro de
Toledo, and the Bourbon Charles III all extended the city. Finally in
1860 the kingdom of which Naples was the capital was united to the
kingdom of Italy.

Naples has not so many historic and artistic monuments as other Italian
cities; but in the museum are preserved valuable treasures from Pompeii
and Herculaneum, the old Roman cities that were destroyed by Vesuvius,
and only within recent years have been excavated.

The best view of Naples may be had from the Bay of Naples. The city
is built at the base and on the slopes of a range of volcanic hills,
and rises from the sea like an amphitheater. The Castle of St. Elmo
occupies a hill, from which a transverse ridge runs south to form
the promontory of Pizzofalcone and divides the city into two natural
crescents. The western part, the Chiara ward, is a long, narrow strip
between the sea and Vomero Hill. This is the fashionable quarter. To
the east lie the oldest and busiest quarters, of which the long Via
Roma is the main street.

One cannot speak about Naples without mentioning Vesuvius. As one
writer said, “Mount Vesuvius is to the Neapolitan bay what Fujiyama is
to many a landscape of Japan,--the lofty background of the picture, and
the grand presiding genius of the place. By day it proudly waves its
plume of smoke, by night its torch of fire, as if it claimed to be the
champion of destruction.”

A cable railway ascends Vesuvius now, and for many years the mountain
has been quiet. But it is only slumbering. Some day it will break
loose again and pour forth its streams of redhot lava, its agents of
destruction.

COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




Let Your Friends Share the Privilege of Membership in The Mentor
Association


The Course for One Year Provides:

1--A growing library of the world’s knowledge--twenty-four numbers a
year.

2--A beautiful art collection for the home--one hundred and forty-four
art prints in sepia gravure and color.

3--One hundred and forty-four crisp monographs--one to accompany each
Mentor Gravure.

4--A reading course throughout the year.

5--An education for all the family, under the direction of the foremost
educators in this country--in art, literature, science, history,
nature, and travel.

Send the names of three friends whom you wish to nominate for
membership, and to whom you would like to have us send presentation
copies of The Mentor.




THE MENTOR

The Mentor Service


This service covers the needs of those who want to gain knowledge by an
easy and agreeable method.

Send for our booklet descriptive of The Mentor Club Service. It
presents many varied Mentor courses specially planned for the use of
reading clubs.

The Mentor Association will supply to its members supplementary reading
courses dealing with any or all of the subjects in The Mentor Courses.
These courses of reading are prepared under the direction of the
Advisory Board of The Mentor--all of them prominent educators.

The Mentor Association will also secure books for members, supplying
them postpaid at publishers’ prices.

The Mentor Inquiry Department gives to its members a full and
intelligent service in answering inquiries concerning books, reading,
and all matters of general information having a bearing on The Mentor
Courses.

MANY READERS HAVE COME TO KNOW THE VALUE OF THE MENTOR SERVICE. IN THE
FULLEST SENSE IT SUPPLEMENTS AND ROUNDS OUT THE PLAN OF THE MENTOR. ALL
MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION ARE INVITED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS SERVICE

THE MENTOR BINDER

Every page of The Mentor, cover included, contains matter that readers
want to keep. The Mentor Association is now supplying to its members
a binder which holds twelve or thirteen Mentors and has proved
satisfactory in every way. This binder has been arranged so as to
hold The Mentor complete and it has tapes to which the pictures are
attached, so that they swing freely in their place and the pictures can
be enjoyed as well as the text on the back.

The price of these binders is One Dollar each.

MAKE THE SPARE MOMENT COUNT







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE MEDITERRANEAN, VOL. 1, NUM. 39, SERIAL NO. 39, NOVEMBER 10, 1913 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


