The Project Gutenberg eBook of University of California Library Handbook 1918-1919
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: University of California Library Handbook 1918-1919

Author: University of California . Library

Release date: April 27, 2016 [eBook #51874]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by MWS, Adrian Mastronardi and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY HANDBOOK 1918-1919 ***

    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

    LIBRARY
    HANDBOOK

    1918-1919

    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
    BERKELEY




CONTENTS


    Historical Sketch                                1

    Description of Building                          3

    Classification                                   5

    Catalogue                                        7

    Book Stack                                      10

    Circulation Department                          11

    Reserved Book Room                              13

    Inter-Library Loans                             15

    Special Collections                             16

    Seminar Rooms                                   18

    Departmental Libraries                          19

    Reference Department                            21

    Accessions Department                           25

    Rules and Regulations                           28

    Index                                           37




UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY HANDBOOK 1918-1919




PREFACE


This handbook has been prepared chiefly for the convenience of
students and members of the faculty, but it may also be of interest
to university and college librarians and their assistants. It is
a directory of the University Library, intended to facilitate the
use of the books by indicating their location and arrangement and
describing the aids by which easiest access to them may be obtained.
The regulations necessary to safeguard their use are appended.

This handbook was approved for printing on April 15, 1918, by the
Library Committee.




HISTORICAL SKETCH


The University Library had its origin in the small collection of
books that belonged to the College of California. In 1868 the College
transferred its library numbering 1036 volumes to the University. Five
years later, the collection was moved from Oakland to Berkeley and
was located in the north end of South Hall. These quarters soon became
too small and in 1876 Henry Douglass Bacon gave $25,000 toward the
erection of a separate library building. The State of California in
1878 added an equal amount to this gift and in 1881 the Bacon Library
was completed.

The bequest in 1904 by Charles Franklin Doe of twenty-four per cent
of his estate made available approximately $750,000 for the present
library building. In 1911 a little more than half the building was
completed, and in May of that year the collection was moved from the
Bacon Library to the new building. A state bond issue made possible its
completion in 1917.

The University Library now numbers 375,000 volumes, the average annual
increase for the last five years being about 25,000 volumes. This
growth has been made possible by a University book appropriation,
supplemented by special funds, in particular, the Michael Reese fund,
available for purchases in any field, the Jane K. Sather funds for
classics, history, and law, the Ernst A. Denicke fund for German
philology, and the Eugene Meyer, Jr., fund for history.

Valuable gifts of books in special fields have also been made, such as
the many contributions of Mr. J. C. Cebrian in Spanish literature, and
the donations of Louis Sloss, Jacob Voorsanger, and Alfred Greenebaum
toward a Semitic collection.




DESCRIPTION OF LIBRARY BUILDING


The building is in the classic style of architecture and was designed
by John Galen Howard. It is a steel frame, fireproof structure of the
highest class, with outside dimensions of 262 feet by 224 feet. The
exterior is of California granite with roof of red mission tile. The
total cost including furnishing was $1,200,000.

It is rectangular in form, the covered central court, slightly over 100
feet square, being reserved for book storage, in two nine-story stacks
of a combined capacity of one million volumes. At present only one of
these stacks has been installed. The main entrance is from the north.
To the left of the vestibule is the Bancroft Library, a collection
under separate administration devoted to the history of California
and the Southwest. To the right is the Reserved Book Room where are
shelved those books designated by instructors as class references for
the current semester. The remainder of the ground floor is given up to
seminars 110 to 132.

The main stairway leads directly to the Delivery Hall where is the Loan
Desk, with the entrance to the stack directly behind it. Opposite the
Loan Desk, facing north, is the Reading Room, 210 feet long and 53 feet
wide, with a seating capacity of five hundred and shelf room for about
twenty thousand volumes. In it will be found all reference books except
indexes, and in addition a fairly representative collection of general
literature. At the east end of the Delivery Hall is the Reference Room
through which access to the new Periodical Room is obtained. This
latter, 135 feet long by 45 feet wide, extends down the east side of
the main floor and provides seats for 240 readers and shelf room for
the current magazines in most general use. The administration rooms
occupy the corresponding position on the western side of this floor,
the Associate Librarian’s Office and the Accessions Department, with a
common entrance from the Delivery Hall, the Librarian’s Office and the
Catalogue Room opening on the west corridor. Two rooms for the use of
the library staff, three for instruction in library science, and one
for binding preparation and for supplies extend across the south. The
Union Card Catalogue will be found in the corridor leading to these.

On the third floor, reached by the western staircase and by the
elevator, are the Library of French Thought (room 303), seminars 307 to
317, the map room (318), and a room (320) holding books not suitable
for shelving in the regular stack. On the fourth floor are rooms 405 to
438, the majority used as private studies for members of the faculty,
but a few of them combination seminar rooms and offices.

There are also basements on the south and west sides, the former used
by the University Press as a storage room, the latter, furnished with a
freight entrance and a staff elevator, being the library receiving and
unpacking room. From the rear of the building between these is a public
entrance. This by means of a corridor and stairway, enables readers
from the south to reach the ground floor.




CLASSIFICATION


The books in the Library are at present arranged according to two
systems:

1. =The Library of Congress classification=, slightly modified. It
is expected that the entire library will ultimately be reclassified
by this system. Letters are used for main classes, subdivisions are
chiefly indicated by numbers. The subjects now included in this
classification are:

    CJ  Numismatics

    CR  Heraldry

    D   History and topography, except America (in progress)

    E   American history

    F      ”        ”    (local)

    G   Geography, Anthropology, Folk-lore, Manners and customs,
        Sports and games

    H   Social sciences

    J   Political sciences

    L   Education

2. =The Rowell classification= which covers all subjects not
reclassified. In it instead of letters, the classes are indicated by
numbers from 1 to 999 with some sub-classes given lower case letters
following these. A brief table of important main classes follows.

      1-15   Philosophy
     16-51   Religion
    289-299  Law
    333-561  Science
    578-599  Industrial arts
    600-681  Fine arts
    682-999  Philology and literature

All books in the stacks are arranged according to these classifications
and shelf lists on cards are available in the Catalogue Room. These
are useful because they show all books in a class whether or not they
happen to be on the shelves at any one time.




CATALOGUE


The library card catalogue is filed in cases in the east end of the
Delivery Hall and is in two parts.

=The Main Catalogue= is a record of the works in the library. It gives
an entry under author, under title, if distinctive or in case of
periodicals, and also under specific subject or subjects if the books
have been classified according to the Library of Congress scheme.
For example, James Allan’s “Under the dragon flag” (reclassified) is
entered in the catalogue under Allan, James; by title: Under the dragon
flag; and by subject: Chinese-Japanese war, 1894-1895. Thus there are
three avenues of approach, one for the reader who knows the author’s
name, another for the reader who remembers the title, but cannot
recall the author, and a third for the reader who wishes something
on the Chinese-Japanese war and has no definite book in mind. Books
not classified by the Library of Congress scheme but still under the
Rowell classification have the usual author and distinctive title cards
in the main catalogue, but in place of a subject entry will be found
a reference from the subject to that number in the classed subject
catalogue where it will be found. For example, Freud’s “Interpretation
of dreams” appears in the main catalogue under Freud, Sigmund, and
under Interpretation of dreams; but instead of appearing under the
subject Dreams there is a reference card under that word which reads:
Dreams, see subject catalogue under 11 _d._ On turning to the subject
catalogue at that number the reader finds not only Freud’s book, but
all other books in the library on the subject of dreams.

=The Classed Subject Catalogue= occupies one face of the two cases
nearest the entrance to the Reference Room and covers only the subjects
still under the Rowell classification. It is a numerical arrangement of
the cards in the order in which the books stand on the shelves i.e.,
all cards on a given subject are grouped together under one number.
Indexes in book form referring from subject to number are to be found
on the tables reserved for consulting the catalogue.

The reader wishing books on meteors, for example, finds in the index
opposite the word meteors the number 369. He turns to the classed
subject catalogue at that number and sees there the library’s resources
on that subject. He will also find in the main catalogue under the word
meteors, a reference card: Meteors, see subject catalogue under 369. So
whether he consults the printed index or the main catalogue, he will
be referred to the same place in the classed subject catalogue.

=The Call Number= (which indicates the classification and the shelf
location of the book) is in the upper left hand corner of the catalogue
card. It must be exactly copied in the corresponding place on the call
slip to enable an attendant to find the book.

=Removal Slips.=--For various reasons it is frequently necessary to
remove cards from the catalogue. When this is done a colored removal
slip is placed in the catalogue bearing the author’s name, title, and
call number, and the initials of the assistant who has the card. This
does not indicate that the book is off the shelf. It may as readily be
obtained by copying the call number, author and title from the removal
slip, as from the original card.

In the process of reclassification, it is necessary to remove the books
from the shelves and the cards from the catalogue. When this is done, a
card stamped RECLASSIFICATION, bearing the author’s name and the title
of the book, is filed in the place of the author card removed. If the
book is desired by a reader, it must be requested at the Loan Desk with
the statement that the card is marked RECLASSIFICATION.

When difficulty is found in using the catalogues or in locating
references to material supposedly in the library, inquiry should always
be made at the Reference Department.

=Other Library Catalogues.=--The catalogues of other large libraries
form important bibliographic aids. The following are available in this
library:

The Union Depository Catalogue, filed in cases in the south corridor,
main floor; this includes author cards for the books in the Library of
Congress, various government departmental libraries in Washington,
D.C., and such cards as have been printed by the John Crerar Library,
Harvard University, University of Chicago, University of Illinois,
University of Michigan, and Newberry libraries.

In the Catalogue Room will also be found certain printed catalogues
in book form, chief among which are those of the British Museum,
Bibliothèque Nationale, Boston Athenaeum, London Library, Peabody
Institute Library, and Surgeon General’s Library. These may be
consulted in the Catalogue Room between 9 A.M. and 5 P.M. At other
hours apply to the Reference Department.




THE BOOK STACK


Members of the faculty have free access to the stack. Permits are
required of all others. Card for stack permit may be obtained at the
Loan Desk by a graduate student and should be filled out and signed by
his instructor before being presented to the Associate Librarian for
approval. Though undergraduates presenting a reasonable request at the
Reference Desk will be given an opportunity to look over the literature
of any particular subject, permits for any length of time will only be
issued in exceptional cases for, in general, undergraduate needs are
met by the Reading Room and Reserved Book collections.

As far as possible books are arranged on the nine floors of the stack
in proper classification sequence, but as convenience of access has
caused some exceptions, a guide is posted on the central case as one
enters the stack on the main floor. More detailed charts will be found
on each floor.




CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT


=To call for a book not on open shelves.=--As it has been found
impossible to allow free access to the stack, it is necessary to apply
for books at the Loan Desk. The procedure in drawing a book is as
follows:

A call slip when properly filled out, giving call number, author,
title, name and address of the borrower, should be presented at the
east end of the Loan Desk. An attendant at the desk will procure the
book from the stack or make a report as to its location.

If the book is to be used in the library a white “Library Use Slip”
should be filled out; if for home use a manila “Home Use Slip” is
required. This distinction is important for a book taken out on a
Library Use Slip is overdue if not returned the day issued. A reader
must return books drawn on the Library Use Slip to the Loan Desk before
leaving the library. He will be held responsible for books drawn in his
name so long as his slips remain unclaimed.

=To have a book held.=--A book which is on loan and is desired by
another reader will be reserved on its return if request is made. The
inquirer will be given a postcard which should be filled out and left
with a loan desk attendant. When the book is returned this card will be
mailed notifying the inquirer that the book will be held four days.

=To renew a book.=--A book may be renewed if not in demand by another
reader and if request for renewal is made before it becomes overdue.
To renew a book it is necessary to give the attendant at the Loan
Desk either the book or the call number and the name of the person to
whom the book is charged. Wait until the attendant reports whether or
not the book can be renewed. Misunderstandings occur because a book
cannot be renewed and the borrower has left without waiting to get this
report. A renewal may be made by mail or by telephone but there is less
chance of error when the borrower calls in person. A book which is
overdue will not be renewed and cannot be drawn out again by the same
person until the following day.




RESERVED BOOK ROOM


Books selected by members of the faculty as assigned readings for their
students are known as reserved books and are shelved in the Reserved
Book Room on the ground floor of the library, to the right of the main
entrance. They are grouped on the reserve shelves according to courses
of instruction and a list giving the name of the course and the number
of the case where the books for that course are shelved is posted on
the bulletin board.

An alphabetic author catalogue of the books on reserve, giving their
location by case and shelf, is on file just inside the entrance. If
the desired book is not readily found on the shelves, consult this,
for occasionally the same book is wanted for more than one course, or
there are copies of the same title in different reserves. When class
references are given try this catalogue before asking at the Loan Desk.

The books forming the History 1 collection are arranged in call number
order in cases 14 to 92. There is a separate card catalogue giving
a list of these books and their call numbers also a chart to aid in
locating the book by the call number.

To draw a book from the room go through the turnstile, select the book,
copy author’s name, short title, and the call number as it appears on
the back of the book. Sign name and address, and present slip and book
to the attendant at exit.

Readers are requested not to take books or handbags into the enclosure.
They should also note that while books may be carried from this room
to other parts of the library, excepting for overnight charges, they
are issued only for use in the building and should be returned as soon
as continuous reading is over. They should not be passed on to other
readers or left out of use on some shelf or table while the borrower
is away at class or meals. To allow most equitable use of these books
readers may have only one out at a time, but a dictionary or atlas may
be taken in addition.

Before leaving the library, return to the discharging desk in the
Reserved Book Room all books drawn out, and reclaim and destroy slips.
Readers who do not care to wait for call slips may leave books on
the return desk or drop them in the slot cut in it, but as they are
responsible for books as long as their slips remain on file, reclaiming
them insures against possible error.

For the rules and regulations regarding library and home use of books
and for the penalties prescribed for failure to observe them, reference
should be made to pages 29-36 of this handbook.




INTER-LIBRARY LOANS


The resources of the library are supplemented by borrowing from other
libraries books not readily obtainable by purchase. The individual in
whose behalf a loan is solicited pays all transportation charges and
undertakes to conform to the conditions of use made by the lending
library. This library also lends many books to other libraries.
Individuals living some distance from Berkeley should request loans
through their local libraries. As this library is primarily for the use
of the university faculty and students, applications for loans by other
libraries should be restricted to books difficult to obtain by purchase
and not available in a nearer library. All requests for inter-library
loans should be made to the Librarian, who alone is authorized to lend
books to other libraries or borrow from them.




SPECIAL COLLECTIONS


The few special collections of this library are housed in separate
rooms and the books in them are restricted to use in the building.

=The Archives Room= on the mezzanine floor over the Reference Room
is open only to those having the permission of the Librarian; others
needing material kept there should apply for it at the Reference
Desk. Very complete files of faculty and student publications and all
available material illustrating the history of the University are
shelved in this room.

=California literature= has for many years been made the object of a
special collection, and several hundred volumes of poetry, drama, and
general literature by Californians will be found shelved in the book
stack under nos. 984-985. The portion of the collection classified as
fiction (986) is separately shelved in room 320 and is not for general
use. To consult the fiction a special permit must be obtained from the
Librarian who will consider only applicants doing serious work in that
field.

=California and Pacific Coast history collections= will be found in
the Bancroft Library, on the ground floor to the left of the main
entrance. This, the most complete collection of material in its field,
is under separate administration and for the most part its books are
not included in the General Library catalogue.

=The Chinese collection=, about 3600 individual works, shelved in room
425, is the gift of Mr. S. C. Kiang, whose family for generations
had been gathering together this library of Chinese literature. A
card catalogue of the contents will be found in the room. Students
in Chinese also have access to the private collection of Professor
Emeritus John Fryer, who has very kindly shelved his Chinese library in
room 416 and made it available to scholars.

=The Library of French Thought=, to be found in room 303, was presented
to the University by the French Government through The Friends of
France. The titles were selected by professors of the Sorbonne as the
leading contributions of French writers in all fields of knowledge. It
consists of about 2500 volumes and originally formed part of the French
exhibit at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition.

=The Karl Weinhold Library=, presented to the University by John D.
Spreckels, is now in seminar 113. It was the private library of the
late Professor Weinhold of the University of Berlin, who had gathered
together in it over 6000 volumes and more than 2000 pamphlets devoted
to Germanic language, literature, folklore, and antiquities. The
original editions of works of literature in which it is especially rich
are listed in Library Bulletin 16.




SEMINAR ROOMS


These rooms are for the exclusive use of faculty and students of
the departments to which they are assigned. Keys may be obtained
at the Reference Desk but will be issued only to those who secure
an application card, have it approved by a professor or instructor
holding classes in the room, and make a deposit of one dollar with
the University Cashier. Keys to table drawers may also be obtained on
additional deposit of one dollar per key. No exemption from key deposit
will be made to any but those holding Regents’ appointments. Reference
should be made to page 33 for seminar regulations.

The present assignment follows:

_Ground Floor_

    110-111    Agriculture
    112        German
    113        German (Weinhold Library)
    114-117    Economics
    118-120    Political Science
    121        Anthropology
    122-123    Philosophy
    124-127    English
    128        Public Speaking
    129        History Sources Library
    130-132    History

_Third Floor_

    303        Library of French Thought
    307        French
    308        Spanish
    309        Mathematics
    310        Astronomy
    311        Latin
    312        Classical Archaeology and Ancient History
    313        Classical Library
    314        Greek
    315-316    Education
    317        Geography

_Fourth Floor_

    416        Oriental Languages
    419        Slavic Languages
    421        Semitic Languages
    425        Kiang Library of Chinese Literature




DEPARTMENTAL LIBRARIES


The University Library comprises not only the General Library, but also
a large number of departmental libraries, seventeen on the campus,
five in other parts of the state. They are under the control of
the departments, who set the hours and conditions of their use, and
therefore applicants for their books should go direct to them. They are
for the most part made up of books purchased on departmental budgets,
supplemented in some cases by deposits from the General Library. All
books are purchased through the General Library and in the case of
campus departments they are all included in the main catalogue with an
indication of the department in which they will be found in the place
of the usual call number. For those departments outside of Berkeley
only such books as cannot be found on the campus are included in the
public catalogue, but a shelf list of all books in each library is in
the Catalogue Room.


DEPARTMENTAL LIBRARIES IN BERKELEY

    Agricultural College Library      103-106 Agricultural Hall
    Anatomy Dept. Library                    4 Anatomy Building
    Architectural Dept. Library          Architectural Building
    Astronomy Dept. Library         10-11 Students’ Observatory
    Botany Dept. Library         304-308 Hearst Mining Building
    Chemistry Dept. Library                     109 Gilman Hall
    Drawing Dept. Library                  305 Drawing Building
    Engineering Dept. Library       203 Civil Engineering Bldg.
    Geology Dept. Library                        106 Bacon Hall
    Infirmary Library            1 Director’s Office, Infirmary
    Law Library                           210 Boalt Hall of Law
    Mechanics Library                     34 Mechanics Building
    Mining Dept. Library       135 Hearst Memorial Mining Bldg.
    Pathology Dept. Library       1st floor, Pathology Building
    Physics Dept. Library                        120 South Hall
    Physiology Dept. Library          102 Physiology Laboratory
    Zoology Dept. Library                         206 East Hall


DEPARTMENTAL LIBRARIES LOCATED ELSEWHERE

    Citrus Experiment Station Library                 Riverside

    College of Dentistry Library          3rd floor, College of
                                         Dentistry and Pharmacy
                                      Building, Parnassus Ave.,
                                                  San Francisco

    Hooper Foundation Library      1st floor, Hooper Foundation
                                      Building, Parnassus Ave.,
                                                  San Francisco

    Medical School Library           Main floor, Medical School
                                      Building, Parnassus Ave.,
                                                  San Francisco

    University Farm Library                               Davis




THE REFERENCE DEPARTMENT


The Reference Desk faces the east end of the Delivery Hall, between the
Reading Room and the Periodical Room. The function of the department is
to give assistance to readers in their search for information or for
books. Readers should apply here for aid in the use of the catalogue or
for direction in finding the resources of the library upon any subject
under investigation. The Reference Department has supervision over
reference books, periodicals, maps, United States government documents,
university archives and publications, and the “New Books” shelf.

=Reading Room Collection.=--Reference books are shelved in the
Reading Room. Dictionaries, encyclopaedias, yearbooks, indexes, and
bibliographies will be found in the two floor cases (A and B) directly
back of the center desk. The collection of atlases will be found in the
atlas case (C). Other works of reference, together with a collection of
general literature, are arranged by subjects in the wall cases around
the room. Those reclassified by the Library of Congress system begin
with case 1 to the left as one enters, and the books arranged by the
Rowell classification follow them. The Mary Lake collection of English
and American literature occupies cases 112 to 116.

=Periodicals.=--The library receives approximately 8000 serials. The
current numbers of 1200 of these are placed on the shelves around the
Periodical Room and in the adjoining stack. These periodicals are
grouped by subjects. The general magazines are in cases 1 to 4, art
journals in case 5, etc. A directory of the location of subjects will
be found on the bulletin board. A collection of the 296 sets of bound
periodicals most frequently called for is shelved in alphabetical order
in the adjoining stack room or Annex, to which readers have free access.

Recent issues of newspapers are filed in the Annex. The General Library
does not subscribe to California papers as they fall within the field
of the Bancroft Library.

The general indexes to periodical literature, such as Poole’s Index,
The Readers’ Guide, Magazine Subject Index, and the Book Review Digest
are shelved in cases 77 to 79 at the right of the entrance to the
Periodical Room. Instruction in the use of these will be given to any
applicant at the Reference Desk.

Periodicals are not to be taken from the room. The rules governing
their circulation and use will be found on page 30-36 of this handbook.

=United States Government Publications.=--The library is a depository
for the publications of the United States government. The bound volumes
are catalogued and shelved in the stack with other books on the same
subject. Unbound publications are recorded at the Reference Desk and
may be consulted by applying there.

Indexes to the United States documents, covering the period from the
formation of the government to the present time, will be found in case
76, at the right of the entrance to the Periodical Room.

=Maps.=--The map collection is located in the Map Room (318). The
United States topographic and coast and geodetic survey maps, a
selection of the United States hydrographic maps and of those of
the British general staff, together with the maps of the principal
countries of the world, the states of the United States, and the
counties of California make up the greater part of the collection. A
card catalogue of all maps in the Map Room has been compiled and serves
as a geographic index to the collection. To use this catalogue or to
see maps apply to the Reference Department.

=University Publications.=--The library receives many publications
of other universities. Catalogues, administrative reports, theses,
department and student publications come unbound. These are recorded in
the serial record and are filed alphabetically under the name of the
university on the first floor of the stack. A collection of the latest
catalogues of the larger American universities is kept at the Reference
Desk.

=New Books.=--New books added to the library before going to their
regular places in the stack are displayed on shelves back of the
Reference Desk. These books are placed there on Monday and are on
exhibition for one week. Readers may reserve new books for home use
by making out a “Home Use Slip” and filing it at the Reference Desk.
Such books will be held at the Loan Desk for three days following the
succeeding Monday.




ACCESSIONS DEPARTMENT


This department has charge of the purchasing of all books and
periodicals required in any part of the University. It also looks after
the building up of the General Library collection by exchange and gift
and the binding of all General Library books and magazines.

On the shelves of its office, on the western side of the main floor,
will be found a good working collection of the trade catalogues and
national and other bibliographies most used in the identification and
ordering of books in English or in the chief languages of continental
Europe. Files of recent second hand catalogues are also kept arranged
by subject. All these may be used in the Accessions Boom between 9
A.M. and 5 P.M. and when it is closed they may be had on call from the
Reference Department.

The card records for book orders kept by this department include those
outstanding, those in process (that is for books which have been
received but may not yet be catalogued), filled orders for the last
fifteen years and orders cancelled because books were not obtainable.
Separately kept periodical, exchange and gift records show what numbers
of any serial were received and their present location in the library.

Copies of all order sheets are filed in binders by department and from
them it can readily be shown what books have been received and their
cost, as well as those still outstanding and the lien on the fund
made on their account. Periodicals and other continuations which form
additional yearly liens on book funds are also listed in the order
files, so statements of the condition of any General Library book fund
can always be furnished on request.

This department has charge of the General Library binding which is done
at the University Printing Office, but for periodicals being held for
binding call should be made at the Reference Department. Records of
those at the bindery are also kept there.

The General Library book fund is distributed by the Library Committee
early in the autumn term and full details of the allotment are to
be found in the printed report sent regularly to all members of the
Academic Senate. Orders for books and subscriptions to new periodicals
should be made on the order cards furnished by the library and should
be signed by the head of the department or such members as have
the authority of the department to do so. They must be filled out
with approximately correct date as to place, publisher, and date of
publication and should be checked with the catalogue before being
handed in. When notification of the receipt of a book is desired both
parts of the special double card must be filled out; merely to sign the
second half is not sufficient. As a large purchaser the library buys
in the cheapest markets and ships by freight, therefore under normal
conditions current American books take at least six weeks and European
importations four months to reach Berkeley. Cards for books needed at
once should be marked “Rush” so that they may be obtained close at hand
or secured by express, but it should be noted that anticipation of
needs will aid the department book funds, for postage or expressage on
rush books is made a part of the cost of such books.

When books are already here or on order the cards will be annotated
with the call number, “in process,” or “on order” and returned to the
person who asked for them. Additional copies will only be purchased on
special request and not more than two copies in all can be bought from
General Library funds. Books or magazines for departmental libraries
are ordered in the usual way through the library, but must be paid
for from the departmental budget, and to avoid misunderstanding the
fund should be indicated under the proper heading. Suggestions as to
desirable material to be obtained by gift or exchange will always be
welcome. Suggestions for purchase of books of general interest should
be sent to the Associate Librarian, but material dealing with any
subject of instruction or investigation recognized by the University
should be brought to the attention of the head of the department most
interested.




ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS


=I. Library Privileges=, including the right to draw books for home
use, are allowed to:

1. Regents, faculty, and officers of the University holding Regents’
appointments, and, on application, officers of institutions of higher
learning in Berkeley.

2. (_a_) Registered students, graduate and undergraduate of all
departments in Berkeley.

(_b_) Students of the Medical School, the Colleges of Dentistry
and Pharmacy, and Hastings College of Law, on showing evidence of
registration.

(_c_) Other employees of the University, at the request and on the
guarantee of their respective department heads, may be granted
privileges similar to those of students.

3. (_a_) Graduates of the University in residence in the Bay region on
depositing five dollars with the Comptroller, this to be returned if
record is clear when privilege is no longer desired. Graduates living
in other parts of the state may borrow through their local libraries.

(_b_) Students living in the Bay region and formerly registered in
the Graduate Division but no longer connected with the University may
obtain library privileges by presenting written request endorsed by
Dean of Graduate Division and making a deposit of five dollars.

4. Others who make application endorsed by two members of the Academic
Senate and pay to the Comptroller an annual fee of ten dollars.
Exemption from the payment of this fee may be made by the Librarians
in the case of officials of the federal or state government, visiting
scholars, or any other exceptional applicants.

Former officials of the University, former students who did not
graduate, graduates of other universities, University Extension
students, and faculties of local schools or colleges other than those
mentioned in paragraph 1 can only obtain library privileges under
section 4.


II. Use of Books.

1. Certain classes of material may be used only within the building.
Among these are the University archives, typewritten theses,
the serial set of United States government publications, U.S.
topographical maps, the collection of bound pamphlets, books shelved in
room 320 and all books marked with a double asterisk (**).

2. Current magazines, bound periodicals in class C, books shelved
in Reading Room, Reserved Book Room and seminars may only be taken
out twenty minutes before closing and must be returned within twenty
minutes of opening next day.


III. Faculty Privileges.

Apart from specially restricted material, the members of the faculty
and those with similar privileges may withdraw books or magazines for
home use without limit as to number of volumes or length of time,
excepting that:

1. Modern English fiction (class 961) is restricted to two weeks.

2. Unbound periodicals which have been in the library thirty days and
bound periodicals (other than class C) shelved in the Periodical Annex
may be drawn only for four days, with privilege of renewal if not in
demand.

3. Any book may be recalled at once for reserve or any other emergency.

4. Any book desired by another reader may be recalled as soon as it has
been on loan two weeks.

5. All books must be returned or the charges renewed once a year.

6. Books must not be carried outside the state without special
permission or left locked up in offices or houses when borrowers are
away on vacation.

7. Faculty privileges do not include the right to confer borrowing
powers on unauthorized persons, either directly or by lending books to
them.

8. Transfers to other members of the faculty may be made, but will be
accepted only when the recipient has assumed responsibility by signing
a new charge slip or acknowledging the transfer in writing.


IV. Student Privileges.

1. Students and all others not specifically granted faculty privileges
may not have more than four books for home use at one time. Overnight
and periodical loans will be allowed in addition. In special cases
assistants without Regents’ appointments and graduate students may
obtain permission from the Associate Librarian to borrow more than four
books at one time.

2. Books drawn for home use (excepting overnight charges) may be kept
for two weeks. Bound periodicals shelved in the Annex are issued only
over night. Unbound periodicals in the library thirty days, may,
however, be borrowed for four days.

3. All books and periodicals if not overdue and if not in demand may be
renewed for the same length of time as the original charge.

4. Transfers of books between students will not be recognized. All
books must be returned, discharged, and a new call slip signed by the
borrower.

5. Any book may be recalled at once for reserve or any other emergency.
A book becomes due the day recalled and if not returned on the third
day overdue borrower is subject to the prescribed fines.

6. Books charged on a Library Use Slip and not returned the same day,
when recalled will be treated as overdue and the borrower becomes
subject to the prescribed fines.


V. Reserved Book Room.

Books shelved in this room in order that all students may have an equal
opportunity to use them, are restricted as follows:

1. Only one book will be issued at one time, but a dictionary or an
atlas will be allowed in addition.

2. A book charged on a white slip must be returned on the day issued or
within the time limit indicated if less than one day is allowed. It
must not be taken from the building, lent to another reader, or left
around the library, but returned and discharged as soon as original
borrower can no longer continuously use it.

3. A book may be taken out on a pink slip on the usual overnight
conditions.


VI. Seminars.

1. Books will be deposited in seminar rooms only at the request of
professors or instructors. They will be placed on the shelves in the
order of their shelf marks, and should be returned to their places when
not in actual use. Such books must not be shut up in the table drawers.
At the close of each term all books will be removed from the room
excepting those needed during the next term.

2. Books deposited in seminar rooms if needed elsewhere may be
withdrawn by library attendants; in such cases the person who requested
the deposit will be notified if book is to be away more than one day.

3. Books deposited in seminar rooms are classed as reserved books, and
must not be removed from the room where shelved. They may, however,
be borrowed overnight subject to the usual procedure and regulations
covering such charges. Students must have written permission of the
professor or instructor who placed book in seminar to borrow it for
longer than over night. All books, whether borrowed by faculty or
students, must be regularly charged at the Loan Desk.

4. The use of the seminar rooms is restricted to professors and
instructors and to students for whom the privilege has been requested
by them. Unauthorized persons must not be admitted by students. Seminar
room doors must not be left open, excepting when classes are being held
in the rooms.

5. Seminar rooms must be vacated by students when the library is
closed. Closing hour week days is 10 P.M.; Sundays and vacation
periods, 5 P.M.

Students failing to comply with the above seminar regulations are
liable to forfeit seminar privileges.


VII. Library Fines and Penalties.

Fines on overdue books are not for the purpose of revenue. Indeed, they
do not accrue to the funds of the library, but they have been proved
necessary to obtain observance of the regulations made to protect the
rights of all readers.

1. On reserved books drawn on white slips and not returned to the
discharging desk in the Reserved Book Room on the day on which drawn
(or within the time limit if issued for a limited period) the fine
is 50 cents a volume; this will be doubled on all books not returned
before noon of the following day.

2. On books or periodicals drawn on pink overnight slips and not
returned to the desk from which drawn twenty minutes after the opening
hour the following day the fine is 50 cents a volume; this will be
doubled on all books or periodicals not returned before noon.

3. On all other books and periodicals which become overdue the fine is
50 cents per volume if not returned on or before the third day overdue,
increasing to $1.00 per volume after the sixth day. On the tenth day
the case will be referred to the Recorder and the delinquent is liable
to be dropped from the rolls of the University. Failure to receive
overdue notices does not relieve from penalty, for the date due is
stamped in each book.

4. Readers are responsible for books drawn by them so long as their
call slips remain unclaimed. Fines resulting from carelessness in
this regard will not be remitted. Books merely left at the desk will
be considered returned when found by a library attendant. Loss or
misplacement of books or periodicals should be at once reported and
adjustment made, otherwise fines will be assessed as above on borrower
charged with them.

5. Any person who marks, damages, or loses any library book or
periodical shall be required to replace it by a new copy. If the volume
is one of a set the loser becomes responsible for the perfecting of the
set and if the book is out of print he will have to pay the current
price of the book as far as it can be ascertained.

6. Any wilful damage to library furniture, equipment, or building will
be repaired at the expense of the responsible person.

7. Any borrower for wilful or continuous violation of library
regulations may be debarred by the Librarians from library privileges
for the remainder of the current semester and for such other specified
term as the President may direct.




INDEX


                                                  PAGE

    Accessions department                           25

    Accessions room                                  4

    Administrative rules and regulations            28

    Alumni, Library privileges of                   28

    Archives room                                   16

    Bancroft Library                             3, 17

    Bibliographies (trade)                          25

    Binding                                         26

    Book fund                                       26

    Book stack                                      10

    Book trade catalogues                           25

    Books, How to take out                          11

    Books, Ordering of                              25

    Building, Description of                         3

    California history collections                  17

    California literature                           16

    Call number                                      9

    Call slips                                      11

    Catalogue                                        7

    Catalogues of other libraries                   10

    Circulation department                          11

    Chinese collection                              17

    Classed subject catalogue                        8

    Classification                                   5

    Departmental libraries                          19

    Description of library building                  3

    Depository catalogue                         4, 10

    Desiderata                                      28

    Exchanges                                       25

    Faculty privileges                              30

    Faculty publications                            16

    Fines and penalties                             34

    Historical sketch                                1

    History 1 collection                            14

    History sources library                         19

    “Hold” cards                                    12

    Holidays                                Back cover

    Home use slip                                   12

    Inter-Library loans                             15

    Karl Weinhold library                           17

    Keys to seminars                                18

    Keys to table drawers                           18

    Kiang library (Chinese collection)              17

    Library fines and penalties                     34

    Library hours                           Back cover

    Library of Congress catalogue                   10

    Library of Congress classification               5

    Library of French Thought                       17

    Library privileges                              28

    Library use slip                                12

    Loan desk                                    3, 11

    Loan department (Circulation department)        11

    Main Catalogue                                   7

    Maps                                            23

    Mutilation of books                             36

    New books                                       24

    Non-circulating books                           29

    Order department (Accessions department)        25

    Overdue books                               13, 35

    Periodical indexes                              23

    Periodical room                              4, 22

    Periodicals                                     22

    Periodicals, Ordering of                        25

    Permits to stack                                11

    Reading room, Size of                            4

    Reading room collection                         22

    Reference room                               4, 21

    Reference department                            21

    Regulations                                     28

    Removal slips                                    9

    Renewals                                        12

    Reserved book room                           3, 13

    Reserved book room rules                        32

    Reserving a book on loan                        12

    Rowell classification                            6

    Rules and regulations                           28

    Seminar rooms                                   18

    Seminar rules                                   33

    Special collections                             16

    Stack                                        3, 10

    Stack permits                                   11

    Student privileges                              31

    Student publications                            16

    Subject catalogue (alphabetical)                 7

    Subject catalogue (classed)                      8

    Union depository catalogue                   4, 10

    United States Government publications           23

    University and college publications             24

    Use of books                                    29

    Violation of library regulations                36

    Volumes in University Library                    2

    Weinhold Library                                17




LIBRARY HOURS


DURING SESSION:

Monday to Saturday, 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.

Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.

VACATION SCHEDULE:

Monday to Saturday, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.

Sundays, closed.

The Library is closed Christmas and New Year’s Day. Offices are closed
on other administrative holidays, but public departments are open as
usual.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY HANDBOOK 1918-1919 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


