The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Theatrical Primer
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Theatrical Primer

Author: Harold Acton Vivian

Illustrator: Francis P. Sagerson

Release date: July 3, 2016 [eBook #52491]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by deaurider, Dianne Nolan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEATRICAL PRIMER ***




Produced by deaurider, Dianne Nolan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





    TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

    Italics are indicated by _underscores_.

    Hyphenation inconsistencies: both Bald-headed and Baldheaded are
    used.




  The

  Theatrical Primer


  BY

  HAROLD ACTON VIVIAN




  _Illustrations by
  FRANCIS P. SAGERSON_


  G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY

  PUBLISHERS       NEW YORK




  COPYRIGHT, 1903, BY

  H. A. VIVIAN


  COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY

  G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY


  _The Theatrical
  Primer_




The Theatrical Primer




1


Here, children, is a Theatre. A Theatre is a big Playhouse where actors
Act--sometimes. It is a pretty building, is it Not? It costs two big
Dollars to get into a Theatre but People are always in a Great Hurry to
get out. This is right, as it Helps the actors to act. When you go to a
theatre you should always Cry as Loud and as Long as you can. It gives
great Pleasure to all the People, and makes your Mother feel Good.




2


Oh, see the Press Agent! Is he not a wonderful Thing? Next to the
Theatre, he is the most Important Thing in the Business. He is much
Greater than the Manager, but he does not get so much Money. The Press
Agent always tells the Truth, and loves to give away Free Tickets. Do
not offer him a Drink or a Cigar, because he will surely refuse, and
then You will feel Badly.




3


The Man looks Anxious. He is a Manager, and he thinks the Treasurer
is Swiping his Money. Fie on the Treasurer! The Poor Manager has so
little money that He can only take one Drink at a Time. Ask the Manager
for tickets. He will pay for them out of his own Pocket. He is such a
Charitable man. Try to be like the Manager, little children, and when
you grow Up, you will always be without Money. Money is a great Curse.




4


This is a Chappie. No, it is not an animal; it is a human Being.
Its real name is E. Z. Thing. What do you think the Chappie is Good
for--Nothing? Oh, fie, it is surely good for Something. Yes; it is
Good to buy suppers for Chorus Girls. Sometimes it buys Flowers Also,
and has them Charged to Papa. Papa is sometimes a Chappie himself. That
is right; yell "Chappie" as Loud as you can. It is not Vulgar to Yell
on the Street, and the man likes to be called by such a nice name.




5


Here we see an Actor. No; do not Touch him or you will soil his
Clothes. Are not his Clothes wonderful? And just Think, they are all
Paid for! He wears his Hair long because the Barber shops are Closed
on Sunday. He is Very busy all the week, you know. He has to walk up
and down Broadway several Times every day. Actors are very Nice men.
They always say good Things about other Actors, and never talk of
Themselves. No; none of them wears corsets.




6


Isn't that dog Tiny? It's the Leading lady's pet Poodle. Oh, see how
nicely it snaps at Everything! The Leading lady has Taught it to do
that; Snaps are right in her line. Everyone loves the Little Dog.
It is so Gentle and Loving. Kick the Dog in the Ribs, Johnny. It
will please the lady if you do--and the Dog--and the Manager. See the
Manager laugh.




7


Here we see a Lobster. The Lobster is going to Buy a Ticket from the
Speculator. Will they let the Lobster into the Theatre? Oh, I guess
Yes. See; the Speculator has put the Money in his Pocket. Will he
give the Treasurer some of the Dough? Perhaps; if he is a very Kind
Speculator. How fortunate for the Speculator that there are Lobsters.




8


Do you see the Clever Usher? He has Sold two seats in the Front Row.
What will he do when the man who Bought the Seats at the box office
comes in? He will say that there is a Mistake, and the Man will sit in
the Sixth Row. The Man is from the Country. All ushers are clever. They
need the Money to buy clean Shirts.




9


Come, children, we will Leave now. The last Act is not Over, but the
Audience would sooner see your Clothes than the Play. Run out in the
Aisle and make a Noise. The People will be glad; they are Tired and do
not want to hear the rest of the Play. People do not go to the Theatre
to Hear the Play. What a foolish idea!




10


See the Leading Lady. She is the Greatest Actress in the World. Oh,
no; she does Not think so. She is Modest and Unassuming. She does not
like the Star Dressing Room, but the Manager makes her take it. What
a Cruel Manager! Poor Lady, she has to wear her nice stage Clothes on
the Street. Do not Rubber at her. She does not Like being Rubbered
at. How fond the Leading Lady is of the Leading Man! Last night she
embraced him so Fervently that the Powder came off Her Arms on his
Coat. He likes such Things. They are marks of Affection.




11


Here is a Programme. Is it not a Pretty Book? What lovely pictures of
Corsets and False Teeth. Do not look for Cast of the Play. We will find
that Next Week. The Advertisements are much More Interesting. It would
be Foolish to Print the Cast in Large type, because then We could See
it. How Artistic is the Cover of the Programme! Does it not remind you
of the Delirium Tremens?




12


Oh, see; there is a Chorus Girl. What a beautiful Complexion she has.
And what very White Shoulders. No; of course she cannot sing. But what
a cunning Wink she is making at her Baldheaded Father in the Front Row.
She will meet Him after the Show and take him Riding in her Automobile.
Then they will have Supper in a lovely Restaurant. Father will pay for
the Supper, just like he pays for the Auto. Is he not a good Father to
the Poor Hard-working Chorus Girl? The Chorus Girl is a much better
actress than the Leading Lady, but she is not jealous of the Leading
Lady's success. Not a bit.




13


What a funny little Man that is. He is a Big part of the Syndicate. He
is a very Big Bug, and so kind to Actors. He just Loves to Pay them
Money. But he does Not like to make them work Hard. Oh, No; they just
do what They want to. By and By they Will get too old to Work, and then
he will Buy them a House to live in. All the other Managers love the
Big Bug, because he does not try to Hog the Whole thing.




14


Do you see the Man with the Bald Head in the Second Row? He is a Great
Critic. He gets a Million Dollars for every day that He works. He
Knows all About every Show that will Ever be written. He is good to
the Actors, and will tell Them how to Act Properly. The Actors and
Actresses just Love to read what he Writes. When you Grow up, little
Children, you should try and be Critics, and when you Die you will go
to a place where there are lots of Actors, and they will Give you a
Hot time.




15


Here we have the Little Comedienne. Isn't she the Real Thing? Only
think, she used to be in the Chorus! But she had a very beautiful
Voice, and now she owns the Whole Show. The Police will not let You
walk on the same side of the Street with Her, and the Manager says
no one Else in the Company must Give Pictures to the Papers. She is
very Kind to the Others, and they love her. By and By she will be a
Has-been, and then the other girls will send her Part of their Salary.
It always pays to be Kind, little Children.




16


What do we see here? Oh, this is a Playwright. He has Written a Play.
Will the Manager accept the Play? Oh, no; the Manager could not do
that. It is a Good play, but the Playwright Has not Got a Reputation.
If he should Kill a man he would get a Reputation and then his Play
would be accepted. Perhaps he will go to England and Sell the Play.
Then it will be a Great Success, and the Cruel Manager will be sorry
because he has Missed a chance to Make Money.




17


This is another Playwright. He is a very successful one Because he
Works very Hard. He writes a Dozen plays every year. If one is Good he
Gets Paid for All the rest. Of course he has a Reputation. He made it
by Knitting Socks.




18


What a Large Chest that man has. Yes; he is a Star. He is the only
actor who can Play Hamlet. Did you Know that he Owns a Large part of
Broadway? What is he Saying? He says that he is Not a great Actor. He
thinks the Juvenile plays his Part very Well. He does not Like to
be Applauded. Did he say he got a Hundred Dollars a week? That must
be a Mistake. All stars get at Least Five Hundred. Modesty is a great
virtue, Children. You should Try and be as Modest as the Star.




19


Here we have a Four Hundredth Performance. How young it looks. Has the
Play run a Year? Oh, dear, No. But then there are Matinees, you know.
And Rehearsals. The Piece has played Four Hundred Times. The Press
Agent and the Manager say so. Of Course they ought to Know, and They
always tell the Truth. What pretty Souvenirs! They are Real Gold and
cost More than the Theatre Tickets. How Charitable of the Management to
give them Away.




20


See the Fat Policeman. He walks right past the Doorkeeper. Has he got a
Ticket? No, he has a shield. Why do they Let him in Free? Because he is
a Policeman. Will he make the standees, settees? Of course not. He will
Watch the Show, and if he Likes it He will ask for Two tickets. Will he
pay for them? Don't ask foolish questions, you silly boy.




21


Watch the Pretty lady buy two Fifty-cent tickets. She wants to know
if they are Down stairs. No, they are in the Gallery. In the front
row? Yes. Has the man nothing further in Front? she asks. The Poor
lady would like them in the Centre. Yes, those would do. But are they
on the Aisle? No, there is no Centre Aisle. She says it is not a nice
Theatre, but she Supposes she Must take the Tickets. Are they for
Thursday night? Yes. Oh, that is too bad. She is going to Play cards
on Thursday night, and she wants the Tickets for Friday night. Now she
Will pay for them. How careful she is with her money! She has opened
Her little Bag, and Taken out her Pocket book. Now she has closed the
Bag. She has taken a Two-Dollar Bill out of the Pocket book and laid
it down. She opens the Bag and puts the pocket book back. There; she
has Closed the bag. Now she has got the Tickets. She has opened the Bag
again and put the Tickets inside. The Bag is Closed again now. The man
is Giving her her change. She has opened the Bag, taken out the Pocket
book, closed the Bag, opened the Pocket book, put in the change,
closed the Pocket book, opened the Bag, put in the Pocket book, and
Closed the Bag. How quickly she does not do it. Are there other People
waiting to buy seats? Oh, a few Dozen.




22


Here we have a Box party. Isn't it nice of Them to Come Late, that
Many people can see Them? No, Johnny, they Do not come to Show off
Their clothes. How happy they are. How Mirthful. You can hear them
laugh right Across the Theatre. The Girl in the pink crêpe de Chine
is saying that Pickles do Not Agree with her. Isn't that too bad? The
man is telling her a Story. Pretty soon they Will Laugh out Loud again.
See, the Lovely lady with The Charming manners is looking through her
opera glasses at a Man in the Front Row. Does she Know him? Of course
not, or she wouldn't look at him. When the Curtain goes down, the Men
will Go out on Important Business Matters and the Women will stroll up
and down so That other Women can See their Dresses. Do not try to Watch
the Play, children. The Box party is much more fun.




23


What is this? A Matinée Idol. What a Meek man he is. He says he is Not
handsome. That is not True. The Girls all adore him. How careless he is
with his Clothes. His Pants have not been Pressed in Fifteen minutes.
He is going to Have his picture taken. He had some Taken yesterday, but
They did not Do him Justice. Is the Idol married? Hist! children, some
things are Sacred. Whose little boy is that Following him? That is a
Messenger boy; he reminds the Idol of His dates.




24


Let us steal into the dressing room. See what a cute little place It
is. The leading Juvenile and the Comedian dress here. They like a small
room; it is So easy to make a quick change in One. The management
wanted to Make the Dressing room Larger but there was Not enough
lumber. See; in his hurry, the Actor has left a pair of shoes in Front
of that Chair. Put them behind the Trunk, Clara, and the Actor will
thank you.




25


This is a stick of Grease paint. The Leading lady uses it to Make
herself look beautiful. In this way she can make many dates. The
leading lady is very fond of Dates. Her friends say she always has
dates for Supper. Hold the Grease paint in the Gas flame, Johnny, and
see it Fizzle. Now rub the wet paint on the Looking Glass. Put some in
the Powder box. The Leading lady always uses powder after Paint; now
she can Use both together. Let us hide the Grease paint in the Slipper.
The leading lady will Think it a Great joke.




26


Here we have the Property man. He is making a Ship. Will the ship go?
No. But it will _look_ Real. What a Dusty room this is. Let's dust the
Things off and arrange them. How glad the Property man will be To-night
when he has to Get ready for the First act in a hurry. Oh, here is the
property Man back again. Clara, help Johnny up! The Property man Wears
pointed Shoes.




27


See the Man who was once a Great Actor! He says he is too Good for the
Managers now. His was a Great Hamlet. Does he mean the hamlet where
he was Born? Why does he Not go to work? He will soon Go to work his
friends. He has a very good memory. He remembers ----. Some time,
children, we will take a Month off, and then He will tell us What he
remembers.




28


Look at the Man in the Front row. He has a Clean shave on the back of
his Head. See how hard he laughs. Does he enjoy the jokes? No; he has
seen the Show seven times. What large opera glasses he has. Yes, he
is very short-sighted. The show is a Burlesque. The Soubrette winks
at him. That is because he is Old--and Easy. Will he go on to a Club
after the Show? No; he will go on a Bat.




29


Here we have the Soubrette. No; she is not seventy-seven, she is only
seventeen. Her father was a Blacksmith, and she is very clever with the
Hammer herself. Hasn't she a lovely Shape? It is all her own, too. The
Bill says she Paid twenty-five Dollars for it. She is talking to the
chorus girl. She says she had a Lobster at dinner. Soubrettes are very
Fond of Lobsters. There is an Old saying: "Wherever the Soubrette is,
there will the Lobsters be found also."




30


The programme says the Ushers must not be Tipped. It hurts an usher's
Feelings to be Given money. If we were to give an usher Money he would
give up his Job. You would not Like to see the poor man out of a Job,
would you? All his wants Are provided for by the Management and he
Has no need of money. He gets a very Fat salary and his Family live
in Elegance. How kind of the management to Treat the usher so well!
Of course we will not give the usher money as the Management does not
wish us to. It would be cruel, and Besides we would get very little in
Return.




31


Let us listen to the Manager talking to the actor. The Manager says it
is a fine day. That is not so, for it is Raining. The Actor says he
would Like his Salary. Why does the Manager laugh and say next Tuesday?
The actor tells the manager to go to Yuma, Arizona. Will the manager
go? No, but the Actor will soon begin Counting railroad Neckwear.




32


Children, observe the Bouncer. He is a kind and Gentle man, and carries
a Stick to protect Himself. He is very weak. Clara, yell as loud as
you can. Now, Johnny, whistle on Your fingers. Will the Bouncer tell
you to Stop? Bang! The hospital is just round the Corner. The children
will Come again and see the rest of the Show.




33


Here we see a Poster. The poster says there are Three hundred people
on the Stage. Are there three hundred people on the Stage? Oh! no; not
to-night. One of the Ladies is sick, and Two hundred of the Others are
nursing her. Call the Manager a Liar, Johnny. There! Now we know why
the manager Carries a Cane.




34


Oh! see the Lady crying. She is very Young to be so Tearful. She is a
Matinée girl. Why does she Cry? Is it because the Lovely heroine is in
Distress? No; it is because the Leading man has had His hair cut. She
wanted a Lock of his Lovely hair to Stuff a cushion With. What will she
Do now? She will have to go to Another theatre until the Hair grows
again.




35


This is a Vaudeville joke. How tired it Looks! Yes, it is Worn out.
It has been doing Two a day for Nineteen Years. Once it was nearly
Murdered by a Mean audience. Luckily it Changed its disguise. Will it
ever Die? No; it will Get a Shave and a New disguise, and will go on
working forever. How cruel to treat a good Joke so. What is the name of
the Joke? It is the Mother-in-law joke.




36


Oh, see the Hat. It is a Stovepipe hat, and Belongs to the Manager.
That is, he Wore it until last night. Now he will Have to buy Another
hat. But this hat is good. It Cost Five dollars, and has been Worn
only a Month. Yes, children, but there are other Points about the hat
besides Wear. The size must be considered. Last night a great star,
whom the Manager had Discovered, made a Hit. The Manager's head is
Bigger now, and he must Have a new Hat. Let us take this one and put a
Brick in It. Then when some other manager Cops the Star this manager
can Kick the Hat.




37


Here we have the leading Lady's gown. It cost one Hundred and eighty
Dollars. The leading lady Said so. How pretty and Fluffy it is. Is the
Fluff chiffon or Organdie? The Leading Lady says it is French chiffon,
but the Chorus Girls say it is Organdie from an old Summer gown. How
mean of the Chorus girls! How economic of the Leading lady! Johnny,
tread on the train of the Gown, and we can all see the Fireworks.




38


Are you Cold, children? See, the Snow is Falling. It is very Realistic,
this Snow. It looks like the Real thing, and Makes you shiver. Do not
be Afraid, we will not Freeze to Death. The show is a Frost, but the
Manager is hot. The Snow is made from the Passes taken in last night.
It will not Hurt you. If the Snow keeps up it will be so cold the Poor
ghost will not Be able to Walk. Let us Pray that the Snow will Stop, so
the Hungry actors may see the Ghost walk.




39


Is this a New kind of Music? No; it is a Baby crying. How kind of its
Mother to bring it Out on a Night like this. Babies should Always be
brought to the Theatre. They do so much to Amuse an audience. This is
a very Noisy baby. Perhaps it has Ideas about the Show. That's right,
Harry; get out Your bean shooter and Hit the Baby on the Nut. That will
amuse the Child and perhaps it will Sing for us. If the Mother were
not so big we would Soak her, too.




40


Here we have a Real sword. It is Carried by the Hero. He is a Brave
man, and the sword is very Sharp. Johnny, try and Shave Harry with the
Sword. Try hard! Now Clara, get a Mop, and wipe Up the Blood before the
Stage manager returns. Johnny, hit Harry on the Head with a Hammer. He
should not Make so Much noise. Little children should be Seen and not
Heard. Stick him in the Ribs with the sword.




41


This Man is the Man who has seen the Show. Are you not glad that it
is raining, so that you can Hear him Swear? No; he did not have an
Umbrella when he went in, but he has one Now. He Found it. He is saying
that the Show was Rotten. That is because the Girl who sat next to
him got Mad when he Squeezed her Hand when it was Dark. Of course he
Thought he was Squeezing his wife's hand. Always squeeze hands when You
go to the theatre. It will keep you Warm.




42


How pompous is the Orchestra leader! Do you notice his white gloves?
How they add to his appearance. Perhaps his appearance needs adding to.
Watch him lean over the footlights. See the funny little bald spot on
his head. How commanding he is; all the musicians are afraid of him he
is so fierce. But why the bald spot? S-h-h-h, children, that is where
his little wife pulled the hair out last night.




43


Shades of Napoleon, what have we here? Can you not Guess? Look very
carefully. Ah, it is the uniform that The actor wears. What a shame!
The beautiful Silk that we saw from the Audience last night has All
been taken off and Turkey-red put on Instead. And the silver braid!
Somebody must have Stolen it and put Common rope with Silver paper
round it in Its place. Johnny, run quickly and Get the scissors and we
will Cut off all this make-believe Finery so that the Actor can put on
the Real thing more easily. When the Actor comes he will give Us his
blessing for What we have done.




44


Let us get a Bag of Peanuts. Eat all you want to, children. They will
make you grow. Throw the shells on the floor, and then Step on them.
What a Pretty noise they make! See who can hit the Bald-headed man with
a Peanut. Now the Man is mad. How strange.




45


Let us listen to the actor Make a speech. He is a Great actor, and will
Make a Great Speech. He says he Thanks us for our Kindness. Perhaps he
will lend us a Dollar. He says New York is the Only place. That is
because the hens had stopped laying before he got to Philadelphia. What
a Happy expression the Actor wears, and How glad he is To see us. If we
do Not applaud the Rest of the Piece he will say that We are a lot of
Slobs. But there are Other Actors in the show Besides this one. Yes;
one of them Wrote the Speech.




46


This is the professional début of the Great amateur. She is a Pretty
girl, and Her friends say she is very, Very clever. How Gracefully she
Bows. Just like a Subway derrick. Her voice is like a Bell. Johnny, do
you Remember the Bells on the Cows up country? You naughty boy, she
does Not resemble the Cow! See; she has just come in out of the Rain.
She says it is Bitt-e-r cold. She lays her Wraps before the Fire. Why
does she not Shut the Window? Now she is going Out again. But why does
she leave her Wraps behind? Perhaps she is going to Commit Suicide. In
the Morning, when she sees the Papers, she will wish she Had. The world
is very C-r-u-e-l. So are the Other papers.




47


Here we have the House manager. He says he Is being robbed. While he
is in Business, he will not be lonely if that is true. He is counting
up with the Show Manager. The Show manager also says he is being
robbed. Why don't they go To the Police? The Show manager says there
Were Nineteen tickets in the Box. The house manager says there were
only Seventeen. One of the men is Lying; which one is it? Let us count
the tickets and See. Oh! there are eighteen. Then they were both lying.
Well, they are both Managers.




48


Now we see the Heavy lady. The manager says she is a Light weight.
He calls her that Because she has asked For her Salary Twice in Two
days. Will she get her Salary? No; we do not think she will. To-night
she will do a Shrieking stunt on the stage. To-morrow she will Do a
serio-comic on the Hotel man, and then she will Have a walking part all
the way back to Broadway.




49


Here we have the First-nighter. He comes to the First performance
always. The fifth row Back for his. The manager Knows him. He knows
all the actors and Calls them by their first names. He would like to
belong to the Lambs' Club. After the Show is over he will tell the
Manager, confidentially, just what he thinks about it. The Manager
will listen very carefully and then Forget. Managers have excellent
forgetories. But no Play ever succeeds unless it has the approbation of
the first Nighter. One of them Told me that, confidentially, so it must
be so.




50


The Table is Loaded. There is a real Fowl and a Roast. It is a Banquet
scene. How the actors will enjoy a square meal; they will Think they
have just got their back Salaries. Listen; the leading man says
it is his Birthday feast. He has a Birthday every night and twice
on Saturday. Now he is carving the fowl. Oh! Oh! it is a Pasteboard
chicken! The roast is all wood and paint. But the wine; that looks
very real. Oh, woe! the wine is Naught but Cold tea! How cruel of the
manager to Fool the actors so. The Table is loaded, but Not so the
Actors. At least, not at this kind of a Table.




51


The Kind gentle lady is crying. She is the Actor's landlady. She
spends half the day picking up cigarette stumps from the Floor of
the actor's room. It is a labor of love that she does, for she thinks
the actor is the Most beautiful ever. Such nice Manners as he has, and
he is always so Immaculate. But why is the Little lady crying? Ah, it
is because the Actor is very Poor. He is always waiting for money from
Home, but his people are forgetful. No; he has not Paid his rent for
Many a day. When he pays up will the lady stop Crying? We fear not, for
she will have been in her Grave long since.




52


See the tall Negro. Is not his uniform Gorgeous? What is that he is
Saying? Ah, it is, "Foourr, elseven, emniine," Do you not understand
that he is calling the Carriages? No; it is not necessary for Him
to make such a Noise, but it is very impressive. Why does he use a
Megaphone? Because the Drivers would hear him plainly if he did not and
the Carriages would get Away too soon to Make a great impression.




53


This is a Theatrical photograph. How lovely is the Young woman; how
pensive. She looks like the Madonna. So kind; so good and so sweet.
Does the picture resemble the Actress? Certainly not. Her best friends
would Not know it was a photo of Her. That is right, Johnny; draw a
Mustache on the face. Do not put a beard on Her. Only managers are
Allowed to Beard actresses. Why did the Lady take the pictures if they
do Not look like her? Perhaps she wants to _look_ good anyway. Yes; the
Photographer knows his business. He is a Scotchman and Very canny. He
talks with a Burr.




54


Here we see the Deluded heroine. She has been Deserted by her Cru-el
and faithless Lover. See how Poorly she is clothed. She is trying to
Make an honest living selling Matches. It is snowing and the poor Girl
must sleep on the Doorstep. She is starving; but Why does she not Pawn
her diamond rings? Hush! they are heirlooms. No, Johnny; if she got a
Divorce and became a Chorus girl she would Spoil the whole Show. Then
the manager would be Very angry. Managers are not Always considerate.




55


This man is in a Hurry. He will push the Lady out of His way. That
is Right, because the Lady should have Seen him Coming. He has
stepped on the Lady's dress! Will he say "excuse me"? Certainly not.
How unnecessary, and besides he is in a Hurry. Why does he Hurry
so? Because he is very Thirsty. Thirst is a Dreadful thing. Little
Children, never be Thirsty.




56


Here we have an engaged Couple. Are they not Very loving? See how
accidentally he clasps her hand on the arm of the Chair. Now his
nose is nestling in Her Hair. What lovely hair oil she uses. How
immaculate is his Dress suit. It cost him Two whole dollars and a Half
for the Evening. The Seats cost Him two Dollars. He gets eight per. How
can he afford such luxuries? Oh, he will stand off his Landlady for
a Week. Will the landlady mind that? No, the Landlady was young once
herself. It was a long time Ago.




57


Do you see the Man who has just come in? How Important is his Bearing.
He is going to take the seat next to you, Johnny, so you must be a
Good boy. What a big man he is. He spreads over half your seat, and
his Feet stick out in the aisle. He is sending the Usher to get him
a Programme. How bored he looks; he must Have seen the play several
times. See, he has stopped the Water-boy, and has taken Two glasses
of Water. How interested he is in the Ladies who go up the Aisle. He
must know a Great many of them. No; he is not the Manager, he is the
Proverbial Dead-head.




58


Here we see the Stage Manager at rehearsal. How quietly he sits in his
Chair. His voice is low and he never raises it; his manner is gentle.
One of the ladies does not know her part. Notice how encouragingly the
Manager speaks to her. He says the best Actresses are poor studies. Oh,
one of the men has Forgotten a piece of Business. The low sweet voice
of the Stage Manager is heard again. He wants to Know what the Blankety
blank blank the Man means. Always keep your temper, children. A soft
answer Turneth away Wrath, but a good stiff Punch is more often used.
Be like the Stage Manager, little ones, and when you Die you will have
lots of company.




59


What a large number of Letters. Yes; this is the Actor's mail. Tear
some of the letters Open, and let us see who sent them. In this way we
will save the Actor trouble and he will Love us. Here is one on Pink
paper from Gwendoline. She says the Actor is her Idol. Isn't that nice
of Gwendoline? All young girls should encourage the Poor Hard-working
Actor with kind words. My! Here is one from Gwendoline's Mother.
Perhaps she wants him to meet her daughter. No. She says he reminds her
of an old Sweetheart, and will he go Driving with her in the Park!
Here is a laundry bill Six months old. Throw it away, Johnny; the Actor
will not want to see it. Another letter is from a woman who Wants to
know when He is going to pay the alimony. We had better hang this One
up where the rest of the Company can see It.




60


What lovely diamonds the Actress is wearing. See, she has them all
over her. They Must have cost as Much as Five dollars. No; they are
not imitation; that is a cruel slander started by a Rival. Perhaps it
is the Base rival who steals the Actress's jewels every time they go
to a New town. All actresses' diamonds are Real. They wouldn't wear
Imitations. Oh, Horrors, no! But they are very unfortunate, for the
Diamonds are often Stolen. Are they not Lucky to get them back?




61


This play is a Musical Comedy. It says so on the Bills. Bills are very
useful, for they tell us a lot of Things we wouldn't know Otherwise.
There are two Singing Comedians in the Play. See what Foolish antics
they cut up. No, they are not Crazy; they are very, very funny. Listen;
one of them is Saying a song. Is it not a shame That they Cannot sing!
They would have beautiful voices if they could sing. But then they
would not be called Singing Comedians.




62


This Man must be a Millionaire. He says he is only a Speculator.
Why does he have Wads of Bills between his fingers? That is to show
How many Good things he has met. He is a very kind and considerate
Gentleman, for he will Sell you Better seats than you can get at the
Box Office. They are so Cheap, too. Why, he almost gives them away.
How does the Poor man make a Living? Isn't it real Mean of the
Management to Try and Drive the Nice Speculator out of Business? And
they Try so Hard, too! How does the Speculator get the Tickets if the
Management don't want him to? Well, perhaps You will Know when You grow
up, because this is the age of Miracles. Most likely he uses Psychic
power.




63


Here is a voice. It comes from an Aperture in the Face of the Girl
sitting behind me. I am glad the voice is very loud and Shrill, because
I can hear it above the Silly noise that is being made on the Stage.
The Girl says she is an Intimate Friend of the Leading lady. The
leading lady has advised her to have her voice cultivated. She is going
to Do it, and then she is going on the Stage and Act! Little children,
we should be very thankful that it Will take a Long time to Cultivate
that Voice.




64


How quickly the Usher runs Down the Aisle with the Basket of Flowers.
The curtain is coming down; he will be Too late. Ah, the curtain goes
Up again. How Gracefully the Orchestra Leader hands the Flowers to the
Leading Lady. What a look of Surprise and pleasure is on her face. What
a pretty Bow she makes to the Box. Does she Know any one in the Box?
Dear me, no. Then where do the Flowers come from? Did the Lady order
the Flowers herself? Children, you ask too many questions.




65


This is the Child Actress. She is just the Cutest Ever. So childish,
and such a good little Actress. She is only seven. Her manager says
she is the Wonder of the Age. She can act even better than the Leading
lady. Her salary is very Big, for she has to Keep her poor old Mother.
See, she is winking at the young Lady in the Box. How much alike they
are. Yes, they are Mother and Daughter. But the young Lady is too young
a thing to have a Child. Well?




66


Here we have the Seat in the Gallery. Is it not Lovely; and so cheap.
It and its counterparts are occupied by True Lovers of Art. They are
poor, and cannot Afford to sit downstairs. The Gallery Seat has many
Charms. There is no room for One's knees, so one cannot grow out of
one's clothes while watching the Show. The Fire Commissioner allows
Poor People to sit in the Aisles in the Gallery. Is he not Kind?




67


This is the Water Boy. He is a very Smart little fellow, and hopes
some day to be an Actor. He has many Glasses of water. The people are
Thirsty; they all call and beckon to him. How strange that he does not
Respond. No; it is not strange either. The poor Little Fellow is both
Deaf and Blind. That is why he Got the Job.




68


This young man is Smiling. He is listening to a Group of real actors.
He smiles because he is in such Distinguished company. He is Hoping
that some of his Friends will see Him. Perhaps his Best girl will pass
by. Is he a Thespian? What a Silly question. No; he is a Clerk in a
shoe store. He gets Nine dollars and fifty cents Every week. Listen; he
says his Mother's brother's Great uncle was the son of an Actor. He was
on the Stage once himself, he says. Was it the Landing stage at Ellis
Island? Now he is lending the actors Money. He says he is Tickled to
death. So are the Actors. They may get him Passes to the Show--if they
don't forget.




69


Who is this Stately chocolate lady? She must be the Queen of Dahomey.
How haughty is her Mien; how Proud, how Superior. The vulgar Stage
hands call her Little Eva. What does she do On the Stage? She is the
Leading lady's maid. No Leading lady could act if she had not got a
Maid. A maid is an Absolute necessity. Also, she is sometimes Useful.
She can tell in One minute whether her Mistress' hat is on Straight
or not. What else does she Do? Oh, she carries the Poodle. Some day
she Will help herself to too much of the Actress' cologne and will Get
caught with the Goods. Then there Will be Another chocolate Drop on the
Sidewalk.




70


What a Loud voice the Boy has. Yes; he is a Call boy. What are his
Functions? Why, he Calls upon the actors to Act, of course. Then again,
he Smokes cigarettes. Why does he Call the leading man "Charlie"?
Because he has Known him a long, long Time; as much as Two weeks!
Sometimes the Boy is condescending and gives the actors Tips on how
to act. He tells them confidentially how Rotten the others are. He says
he Thinks the ingenue is a Stupid child! Perhaps she Slapped his face
when he tried to Kiss her. Emulate the Call boy, children. He knows
more about the Business than Any one else.




71


What Beautiful figures these Two men have. The figures are on paper.
They represent the Enormous profits made by the Show. Later they will
be published in the Papers. The public will Be told how enormously
Successful the Show has been. There are Other figures over on the
Table. There is nothing beautiful about the Second set. What are they
for? They are to reckon the Royalty on. The Royalty goes to the Man who
wrote the play. Are either set of figures correct? Ask the managers.




72


You must always believe what you see in the Papers. This paper says the
Show has made a big Hit. What does that Mean? Does it mean that the
management has been hit? Or the public? The paper says the Leading lady
is a Dream. Dear me! Did you Ever have Bad Dreams? Why, this must be
a Press notice; there's a drawback in every Line. Good press notices
swell the Box office receipts. Yes; and sometimes they Swell the press
agent's Head.




73


Hark! Do you Hear the real Fire bells? Oh, see the real Fire engine
_dash_ across the Stage! The horses move Almost as quickly as a
Broadway car. How red the real Flames are. Yes; the Gas bill will be
very High. Do not scream, children; no one will get Burnt. This is
not a Real fire; there is no Smoke. The show is Certainly a Hot one.
It will be Hotter to-morrow--after the Critics have Roasted it. The
programme says the Fire scene is marvellously Realistic. Let us Light
two or three programmes and Throw them into the aisle. There! Do you
notice any Difference?




74


See the Gallery usher. He must be Very tired, for he leans indolently
against the doorpost. Perhaps he does not like his High station. How
Graceful is his pose; how airy his demeanor. His clothes are shabby--or
perhaps it is a new style. We will Ask him to Take us to our seats.
Surely you Did not expect him to Move? Oh, no; he would Not think of
doing That. Instead, he waves His hand gracefully. He says, "First two,
first row." How kind! We will not disturb his rest. But if you will tap
his forehead Gently with a Brick, Johnny, he may wake up.




75


Let us listen to the Popular song. It is being sung by a Charming
damsel. No; Johnny, we are not referring to the Song but to the Singer.
The song ends in _oo-oo-oo_. Isn't it a Masterpiece! And the music
sounds like yellow hosiery. How sublimely entrancing! The song is a
Great success. Everybody will Buy several copies. The song is popular
because it ends in _oo-oo-oo_! No one cares for the rest of the words.
Noble words like These will make any Song popular. If you are a Genius,
Clara, you will write an _oo-oo-oo_ song.




76


This is the Man who plays the Drums. How short he is--and how Fat. He
has three Kettle drums, a tenor and a bass. Sometimes he is a Cuckoo
clock. Oh, listen! Now he is a church Bell. Pretty soon he will Play
on some sticks of Kindling wood tied together. Isn't he clever? Music
seems to come from His finger tips. How deft he is. Of course, he has
never upset a Sugar bowl, Johnny. How did he Get his Wonderful Musical
education? Perhaps it was drummed into him. His wife says She can't get
him to Practise on the kindling Wood at home. What a pity.




77


Isn't this a cute Little envelope? It contains the Actor's salary.
The actor has Told his friends just what Salary he is getting. This
looks like a Very small envelope to hold Such a Large sum. Maybe it
is in very large bills. Actors often do get large Bills. Shall we
look at the Figures on the outside of the Envelope? No; we Might be
disappointed in the actor If we did. Perhaps the actor will Pay back
the Fiver he borrowed, now that he Has got his salary. Can you define
the Word "perhaps," children?




78


Who are all these People standing around? Oh, this is a booking Agency;
a place where They put your name in a Book. Let us listen to what
The people say. From their Talk they must be the Greatest actors and
actresses in the Country. No doubt that is Correct. This large man
says he has Made more great Hits than any Other actor in the Land. Is
a touch a hit? Surely these Great Artists do not come Here looking for
Work. Dear me, no; they Just drop in to get their Mail.




79


Do you Notice the chilly feeling, children? Yes; the lady Star has
Quarrelled with the Manager. She says she will Have her friends Back on
the stage Whenever she likes. The manager says it is against the Rules.
Why is he So angry about a little Thing? Why, don't you know? One of
the friends was a Particular friend. The manager likes to be The
particular friend himself. Will he fire the pretty Lady star? No; they
will have Supper together and all will be Serene. If he should Fire the
pretty lady they Would both go Broke.




80


The monologue artist is a Funny fellow. His salary is very Large and he
is the Real thing. If a joke is not funny he will Tell it over and Over
again. All vaudeville people Think it is a Sin to waste a good Joke.
Can you tell Me where the Monologue artist Gets his jokes from? No; no
one knows that, but He is very fond of Reading ancient Roman books.
You would Never think it from his Talk, would you? Oh, never!




81


Why is this Man called the Low comedian? Is it because he Comes high?
How humorous are his Antics on the stage! On the Street he looks like a
Belated funeral. See what a curt Nod he gives the Leading man as they
Pass each other. Are they not Good friends? Oh, yes, they are Very good
friends, but the Comedian thinks the Show would be Much better if the
leading man were Out of the Cast. Is the comedian Jealous then? No.
Actors are never jealous.




82


What a wonderful thing is the Positively last appearance! The Great
singer is going to Retire. We must Hurry up and get seats so that
We can hear her. Do not delay or we will Miss a great Treat. Is it
not nice of the Singer to give a farewell tour? So considerate! We
remember that she did it when Mother was young. Perhaps, when we have
Grand-children, she will give a Farewell tour for them. Do great
singers never Grow old? No; people who give Last appearances grow
younger every day.




83


Children, observe the Curtain. Is it not a work of Art? The painting
on it is very, very beautiful. The Art is so far above us that we
cannot Tell what the Picture is meant for. Is that a Horse in the lower
corner? Surely it is. How strong the horse is. His limbs are like Iron.
They look it! Why has the Lady with Pink hair got on a Green sheet?
That's a very simple question. The Painter was an Irishman and so by
Putting a fold of the Sheet over the Lady's head he got the Green above
the Red. Patriotic painter!




84


What a crush in the Lobby. The handsome couple are Hurrying to Catch
their train. The man behind has Caught the lady's train for her. He
says, "Excuse me." The lady Smiles and says it is no Matter. She
whispers to her Husband. She says, Blankety blank Ham bones! Is she
not a great linguist? The lady in the Pretty dress in Front of her is
Lifting her skirt very High. She does not want to get it Dirty. What
long stockings she Has. How angry she would Be if she Thought we had
Noticed.




85


What a beautiful Hat the lady has on. It cost Thirty-five dollars.
She is going to sit down. Will she take the Hat off? Dear me, no!
That would be Wasting Thirty-five Dollars. See the Pretty Flowers and
Plumage. How much more beautiful They are than the Old scenery on the
Stage. How kind of the Lady to keep her Hat on so that every one can
Admire it. That is right, Johnny; make paper balls and throw them at
the Hat. Try to hit the Lady on the Ear. She likes playful children.
See, there is another Lady with a hat on. This is not a Play; it is a
Millinery Display.




86


Now, children, you must be very Quiet for we are Up in the Flies and
the Performance is going On. Do you know what those ropes are? They are
to Pull the scenes up and down. Isn't there a lot of Dust up here? Yes;
but it is nothing to the Dust the Manager would raise if He knew we
were up Here. It is not at all Necessary for the manager to raise the
Wind in order to raise a Dust. Oh, dear me, no. Why do they Call the
place the Flies? Because the scenes fly up and Down. Loosen the ropes,
Clara. Yes, three of them. There, do you see how it is Done? But what
is that Noise on the stage? Come, children, I think we had Better go.




87


What a very Nice-looking man that is, sitting Next to you, Harry. He
looks so happy, too. Is he Talking to himself? No, no, silly, he is
just Humming the airs of the Opera. He does that so that We will know
that He has heard the Music before. How thoughtful of Him. Pretty soon
he Will begin to tell the Lady he is with just what is Going to happen.
Naturally she will enjoy the play much Better after he does that. But
would it not Be a nice thing to Repay him for his Trouble? Suppose we
hit him With a Brick when he comes out. That will be a Thoughtful thing
to do.




88


Who is the Handsome man in the Beautiful greasy overalls? Is it not the
Man we saw on the Street car that Every one took for an Actor? What is
he Doing here on the Stage at so Early an hour? Ah! little children,
he is a poor but Honest scene-shifter, and he is About to go to Work.
Can any one tell where He got the Lovely clothes he Wore in the Car?
No? Well, we will not Press the question, and The clothes have already
been pressed.




89


Can you tell me What that thing is Right in front of the Gallery?
Clever boy, Johnny; it _is_ the Calcium light. It is used to Make
pretty colors on the Stage. When the very Interesting scene is on,
the Man who runs it will take particular trouble to Get in the way of
the People behind him. Why does he Do this? Is it Simply because he
is a Calcium man? But you ought to See how Brave and lion-like he is
When he has Forgotten to Throw the Spot light on the Star. He is Very
considerate of the Audience, oh, yes, but He doesn't care a Hang for
the Manager.




90


Hold your breaths, Children, this is Going to be a dark change. All the
lights have gone out, so we Will not be able to See the things on the
Stage. Do you see anything with White shirt sleeves Running across the
Stage? Ah! See the Table get up and Walk off. The scenes are Swinging
around and Disappearing. How funny it is that we think we See things.
Of course we don't, for this is a Dark change. Biff! the lights have
Been lit again. Why does the man in the White shirt sleeves run off the
Stage in such a Hurry?




91


Have you noticed the Wires under your seats, children? They are called
Hat Racks. Some silly people say they Are nerve racking. They are put
under The seats to hold person's Hats. It Never takes more than fifteen
Minutes to get a hat into one, but You can get a hat out in Half an
hour! If you want to Make your Tall hat look like a Derby put it In a
hat rack. The man who Invented them knew how to take Care of a hat,
for the Rack is so arranged that the Hat will fall down on to the Dusty
floor, just when somebody is Going to stick his Feet out under your
Chair.




92


Wait till all the Other folks are gone, my dears, so that we can See
the Sweeper. Ah, here he is. He is the man who sweeps out the Theatre.
Notice how gently he Puts the chair seats up. If any one should lose
their Diamonds, and he Were to find them, would He turn them in at the
Box office? Of course he would! Sometimes he Finds umbrellas. What does
he do with those?--Ah, well, even the poor should Lay something away
for a Rainy day. The Box-office man will Tell you that the Sweeper once
found a set of False teeth and Turned them in.




93


Here we have the Foreign Artiste. See; a reporter is going to Interview
her. She says _bon jour_ to the Reporter. That is so he will Know she
is French. If we listen we will hear Her talk about "gay Par-ee and ze
Nobilitee she have met on ze Continong." What a beautiful accent she
Has. The reporter is Smiling. When he comes out he Will say that she
was Born in Ireland and that her Right name is Murphy. But then, of
course, Reporters always think they Know everything. Ah, the Foreign
Artiste has lost her Handkerchief. Is the language she Uses now, French?




94


The really Great Actress is going to Europe. Her friends are all down
to See her off. They have brought huge Bunches of flowers labelled
"Bon Voyage." With all the Candy she has, she ought to have a bon bon
Voyage. She will go to London first, she Says. Will she stay in London
long? Oh, yes; she will get a Little room in Bloomsbury and Cook
her own meals. When she comes Back she will tell of the Delightfully
Bohemian customs of the English. Will she enjoy her Trip to Europe?
Rahther!




95


Oh, look! the actor is putting on his Shirt. Don't you remember how
Clean and white it Looked last night? But this shirt is Dirty. Or are
these stains of toil? Surely the Actor will not wear this shirt Again.
Do not take too much for Granted, children. Clean shirts are a Very
expensive Luxury. If the actor were a Manager now, he Might wear a
clean shirt Every night. Managers always have Money, but Actors put
so Much in the Bank that they can not afford many Clean shirts. And,
besides, what's the use?




96


Did you notice the Check room? Isn't it a lovely arrangement? There
is Absolutely no charge. The programme says so. When you check your
Overcoat, Johnny, be sure and Leave your change in the Pocket. Then you
will know Where it is. Do not think of Asking for your Overcoat again
Until the next morning. You might inconvenience the Boy in charge
if you did and then he Might make you Wait. There is no Charge for
checking, but If you were to Give the Boy anything for himself he Would
be very grateful. He might even say Thank you.




97


This is a Sad sight that greets us, Little children. Do you know What
it is? It is the newspaper man who has to Go to all the Theatres every
night. He must do this so that If there is anything doing it will be In
the papers. Is there anything Doing to-night? Yes; the Actors are doing
the Managers and the Managers are doing the public. Do the public Like
to be done? There is no such thing as the Public, children; each Man
thinks he is too wise to be Done. But the newspaper man; what About
him? Ah, that is the Sad part of it. The press agents Do him every time
they Get a chance.




98


Let us look into the actor's Trunk. It has just been Brought up to the
Dressing room. The poor actor; he must have Packed his trunk in a Great
hurry. See; here is a Panama hat that he Wears in the First scene,
right on Top. The place for hats is the Bottom of the trunk. Johnny,
take the Things all out and We will re-pack the trunk. There now;
that's much better. Everything that was on top is now on the Bottom.
How Glad the actor will be when he sees what We have done. He will come
in in a Hurry and will be Tickled to death. In spite of his hurry He
will try to find us so that he can Thank us.




99


The hotel Clerk has been to see the Show. He is trying to Make an
impression on the Soubrette. He sent her a Big bunch of Flowers and a
Little note. He would like to Take her to Supper. Does he Know the
Soubrette? Oh, dear, no. He has never seen her Off the stage. He will
wait at the Stage door for Her and will Wear a big Carnation in his
Buttonhole. The man With the broad Shoulders will be there, Too. The
Soubrette will call the Latter "Pop" and will introduce the two Men.
Then the Hotel clerk will say how Pleased he will be to Buy supper for
Three.




100


Step softly, children dear; the actor is dying. He has played many
parts in his life and has made many enemies. Some of them are gathered
round him now; the others have always been his friends. Once he was
rich, but of late he has been poor. His friends and enemies alike have
helped him. They have given their services at benefits and have visited
him. Some who have spoken harshly of him are sorry now, and they say
so. Are there many people as good to their kind as actors and actresses?





End of Project Gutenberg's The Theatrical Primer, by Harold Acton Vivian



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEATRICAL PRIMER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


