The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Passing of Mars: A Modern Morality Play
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Passing of Mars: A Modern Morality Play

Author: Marguerite Wilkinson

Release date: August 6, 2018 [eBook #57650]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by MFR, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSING OF MARS: A MODERN MORALITY PLAY ***




Produced by MFR, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been retained.




  _The_ Passing _of_ Mars

  A Modern Morality Play

  _By_

  MARGUERITE WILKINSON

  Author of “In Vivid Gardens” and
  “By a Western Wayside”

[Illustration]


_Once, long ago, a peasant greatly desired to visit his king that he
might obtain of him judgment and equity, and perhaps find favor. But
he said within himself, “I am a faulty man; a homespun smock will
scarce commend me to a king. I will stay at home and let others plead
my case.” And when his case was taken before the king, (who was a good
and just man) the king said, “Why did he not come himself? Homespun I
can forgive if a man bring his soul and stand before me bravely. I will
have no dealings with go-betweens.”_

_Here then, is my work, faulty, and plainly clad, but brave enough to
go humbly before you who read and think, and by your thinking rule. If
it find favor, it can be clothed anew in finer raiment. If judgment and
equity prevail against it, surely it is well enough shrouded._

  Copyright, 1915, by Marguerite Wilkinson




  To the memory of
  my father,
  a strong and valiant lover of the soul of man, and
  to his brave mate
  my mother


PERSONS OF THE PLAY

  MARS, the ancient god of war.
  SOUL OF MAN, his immortal enemy.
  CAPITAL,  } in cartoon costumes.
  LABOR,    }
  RELIGION, two personalities.
  CULT, the bastard brother of RELIGION, a fantastic _poseur_.
  FLIP, a modern, the sophisticated intellect of large cities.
  SCIENCE, a strong youth in laboratory costume.
  POETRY, a serene old bard with a lyre.
  MUSIC, a fair woman.
  GLAMOUR, her seducer, wearing tinsel.
  TRADE, a harlot.
  THE OLD MOTHER, a plain sibyl of the people.
  Men, women and children of the fighting nations of Europe in national
    peasant costumes.

[Illustration]


THE SCENE

_The World Field, at harvest time and set of sun. On the right is The
World Inn, and, in front of it, on the ground, a prostrate figure,
clad in black and bound, SOUL OF MAN. On the left, near the front,
are trees and flowers, piles of fruit and vegetables, a wagon load
of grain, and, in the foreground, a tangle of vines, in which lies
MARS, fast asleep. On the steps of The World Inn sits THE OLD MOTHER
watching the women of all nations who are sitting sewing, chatting
and tending babies in the center. At the back a road winds across from
left to right and young girls are walking up and down with arms around
each other’s shoulders, singing and laughing. The melody (“The Happy
Farmer”) dies away gradually and a church bell is heard--The Angelus.
There is a religious silence lasting for a moment or two._

[Illustration]


A WOMAN

  The Angelus!

ANOTHER

  Already day is gone
  And gone almost as soon as we began it.
  So goes it nowadays!

THE OLD MOTHER,

  It was not so--
  Days did not hurry through sweet hours to joy
  When I was young, when I was bride and wife!

FIRST WOMAN

  Another blessed eventide is come
  To bring to happy women-folk at last
  Their weary men, all hungry for their supper.

A CHILD

  And some for me. I wants my suppie too!

ANOTHER WOMAN

  Well, there’s a plenty. We are neighbors all
  And what one lacks the others can supply,
  For all the world will share the harvest feast.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  Yea, all the world is here, or will be soon,
  Save my good mate and my five strapping lads
  Who were my world and rotted years ago.

THE WOMAN

  There, mother, there--forget the old sad past,
  For all the world is sweet with harvest scent,
  And we are glad. Come, share with us our joy.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  Forget? Forget? Who tells me to forget?
  A silly chit with everything to learn,
  A ninny who has lived while life is peace
  And therefore thinks that peace has always been
  As it is now. Say, girl, would you forget
  That man of yours torn from between your breasts
  And sent to splice with sabres and with shells?
  Could you forget a baby’s filthy death
  By plague or famine or infesting flies--
  A son’s abasement or a daughter’s rape--
  These things could you forget? I never shall.
  I would be of another race and kind,
  A woman who remembers what has been,
  Who knows that some day it may come again----

THE FIRST WOMAN

  Poor soul, there--I am sorry. I did not know.
  We speak but foolishly to soothe a pain
  Which we have never felt.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  Ah, pray that you
  May never, never know what I have known.

THE WOMAN

  Ay, that I will. But come, and share our joy,
  For there is none to-night to presage woe.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  None save myself. My old bones feel the cold--
  I sense a sorry blackening of the sun
  As night comes on, and any heap of fruit,
  Yes, any wagon load of yellow grain
  May hide from these old eyes their enemy.

THE WOMAN

  (_shrugging her shoulders_)

  Well, hide your grief, poor soul, if grieve you must;
  The men, who look for rest, will soon be home.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  But not to me are any comings home,
  Although I keep The World Inn day by day....
  Yet ’tis an ill thing and a sign of trouble
  For to be weeping when the men come home--
  The men, who should find smiles at set of sun,
  Who should be fed and coddled to their rest,
  These splendid children, when they come to us.
  I will make ready. I will dry my tears.

  (_Exit The Old Mother into the World Inn. Voices are heard without,
  coming nearer._)

A WOMAN

  The men!

ANOTHER WOMAN

  The men!

ANOTHER WOMAN

  My husband--there he is!

A CHILD

  Here is my daddie! Daddie, gimme a kiss!

  (_The men enter in groups of twos and threes with dinner pails and
  tools. They find their families or greet their sweethearts and most
  of the happy couples go off down the road together at the left. A few
  enter The World Inn. There is the rattle of dishes, laughter and good
  cheer. The sun sinks perceptibly and it grows darker. Enter Capital
  and Labor, quarreling._)

CAPITAL

  The pumpkins here are mine, good fellow, mine!
  I bought the seed, you know.

LABOR

  I broke the earth--
  I strove with wind and frost and burning drought
  To make them grow more golden day by day.

CAPITAL

  Tut, tut, man. That is nought. I own the land.
  You can but work it since I give consent.
  Small credit that a man does what he must
  If he would live.

LABOR

  I gave my very life.

CAPITAL

  (_snapping his fingers_)

  What is your life but like a billion more?

  (_Enter Flip, costumed as gentleman of fashion_)

FLIP

  Are there indeed a billion Labors? If so, they will soon keep you
  busy, Capital, old top, as busy as you would like to keep them. You
  may grow thin--O consummation devoutly to be wished! just a little bit
  off the front--if these chaps keep on giving their lives to your
  pumpkins. But if there be a billion just alike--

CAPITAL

  In all the world there are but few like me!

FLIP

  Amen. So be it. Too many yous in one street car would be the hell of a
  crowd, if you travelled in street cars. And too many yous would be
  poor company for one another. Wherever one man has a bulge to his
  stomach, another must find his a siege and a retreat. Well, friends,
  tell me your troubles, and I will be a judge without the recall and
  a jury without opinions to settle the case.

LABOR

  Both of us love the lady men call Trade.

FLIP

  The prettiest of all she-devils, she--

LABOR

  And she is pliant ever to his will
  Who has most power. And we do both contend
  That power resides in pumpkins--but I claim--

CAPITAL

  Of pumpkins we were speaking. Be exact.

  (_To Flip_)

  He claims them all because he planted them.
  Could he have planted them without my aid
  Who pay the wage that buys his daily bread?

LABOR

  I furnish you, your bread, O Capital,
  And cake besides. You do not live on pumpkins!
  All, all is mine. Without me you would die.

FLIP

  Peace, peace. Neither of you could live on pumpkins, nor on power,
  nor would it suffice for either to have complete possession of his
  heart’s desire, the harlot Trade. To live on pumpkins--Lord, what a
  diet! Thick--yellow--mushy--with never a hint of stimulation for the
  uplift of the soul. We must have souls, nowadays, for it is the thing.
  They are nearly as common as tuberculosis, and quite as tragic. But
  those who go awhoring think not deeply of their souls lest they
  repent. And I would not feed my soul on pumpkin to outwit Capital and
  appease Labor--no not I. Rather would I turn viticulturist and try the
  grape cure!

LABOR

  Raisins or pumpkins, it is all the same;
  These things are mine, for I have made them be.
  I, I deliver earth of what she bears
  And am chief nurse at Nature’s lying-in.

FLIP

  A very shocking nurse I will be bound--to go from the sacredness of
  Nature’s childbed, to woo Trade--verily, if the wages of sin be death,
  that would be going from the cradle to the grave!

CAPITAL

  (_self-righteously_)

  For my part I make no pretense at all!

FLIP

  (_slapping Labor on the shoulder_)

  Come, Labor, not so seriously, old top. It is not in good form to care
  so much. We are grown light of touch, to-day, and laugh at bombast.
  And as for the two of you, a true philosopher would tell you that, if
  you were a little more glib and smug, and Capital a little more smug
  and glib, men could scarce estimate the value of the one over the
  other? And what matters a label if, by accident, or skill, or the lack
  of it, the one of you can change places, sometimes, with the other?
  And what matters the ownership if I can so hamper your operations as
  to take too much toll from both?

CAPITAL

  (_sulky and bewildered_)

  I do but set my label on my own--

LABOR

  A dollar sign on earth and sea and sky!

FLIP

  A dollar sign is a good thing anywhere. I’d wear it over all the sense
  I have. And, were I to fill your place, Capital, I should be content
  with dollar signs and labels, and not dispute with poor Labor about
  his pumpkin pie. I would even give him more than one slice if he
  wanted it. He would then think himself rich, and lapse into content
  for an aeon or two. And surely there is more than one way of winning
  a lady?

LABOR

  Be silent, Flip; I do not like your wit.
  This is The World Field that I till and sow
  And woo and threaten, and at last, coerce,
  Until it is the wife of my command
  To bear me children of my days of toil.
  Shall I be cheated of these children, then,
  With smiling face and showy courtesy?
  I tell you no. For I am grown too strong--
  And I am wiser than I used to be--
  I could make garbage of his flabby paunch
  And beat his brains to swill!

FLIP

  (_with mock alarm, running to left and calling_)

  Trade! Trade! you jade--Come here and see your precious lovers
  fight....

  (_Enter Trade, disdainfully, glancing first at Capital and then at
  Labor_)

CAPITAL

  I claimed the pumpkins all for you, my dear.

LABOR

  (_with less gallantry_)

  What is not his no decent man can claim.

TRADE

  (_laughing immoderately_)

  Pumpkins? Who cares for pumpkins? No--not I.
  I only mentioned them to keep you busy,
  For I can hardly settle with you yet,
  Nor judge the better lover of the twain.
  For, at this time, great kings take thought for me--
  Princes and leaders of the people crave
  My kindness--and myself. You two must wait.

LABOR

  Know then it was not all for you I spoke,
  But for a principle--for that I fight.

  (_Labor turns up his sleeves, clenches his fist and takes a stride or
  two toward Capital, who is frightened and blows a whistle in alarm.
  Enter Religion from The World Inn, a little man in black, carrying
  a book, who trots up to Capital as to a master. Capital pinions his
  two arms and holds Religion in front of him. Labor laughs roughly and
  begins to pull off his shirt._)

LABOR

  Come, Flip, your wit is all too deep for me,
  But, if Religion is to second him,
  I would depend on you in my good cause.
  Come, help me strip and then, a fight, a fight!

FLIP

  (_Hesitates, goes to help him, speaks gently._)

  A fight is a noisy affair, Labor, and wakes many sleepers. There is
  one over in the corner who should not on any account be disturbed.
  For, once wakened, he is hard to quiet.

LABOR

  You speak too late--come--help--my shirt is tight!

FLIP

  (_seizing the shirt, gives one tug and then withdraws in haste,
  holding his nose._)

  You are too sweaty, Labor. Sorry, old top, but I can’t stand it.
  Muscles are a rare thing nowadays, and I would like to see yours,
  since you are not afraid to waken that old fear under the vines.
  And these modern epics are amusing, wherein Achilles carries a dinner
  pail and Ulysses turns syndicalist. But, if I must act as a second and
  pull off men’s shirts, commend me to a man who has money enough to buy
  soap and time for a bath, and that, though he were not half so good to
  look upon.

LABOR

  (_outraged, and flinging his shirt at Flip_)

  Take you my sweat upon your silly face
  And stand aside to watch me fight alone....

CAPITAL

  (_Retreating and holding Religion in front of himself_)

  Preach me a gospel to this fighting fool,
  A pretty gospel of The Prince of Peace,
  Religion, you whom I have paid and kept.

RELIGION

  (_Trying to command himself and speaking hurriedly_)

  I will, I will--but wait. For I must think--
  The Word has not the weight that once it had.
  Come, Labor, my good man, what is amiss?
  Come, come, no fighting--that is very wrong....
  Be meek and humble as the good book says!

LABOR

  I loved the good book and its precepts well
  In the old days when first my faith in you
  Kept me from fighting save at your behest
  And for your sake. I listened to you, then.
  You were the Light and in your way I walked,
  Loving and dreaming; but the dreams are gone
  Like your old stature, fervency and power.
  Sermons in livery I will not heed,
  A flunkey’s stale rebuke I do abhor!
  A bought man cannot teach the strong and free--
  My soul is pure, and will not brook your touch!

FLIP

  His soul? Where is it, I wonder? They always talk about them, but
  where are they? Two dunderheads and an adlepate trying to make
  righteousness out of their own inclinations by converse about souls!
  bah!

SOUL OF MAN

  Yet, where men are, I am--yes, even here!

  (_All look about and show that their attention has been arrested, but
  no one sees Soul of Man, nor discovers where the voice comes from._)

LABOR

  (_to Religion_)

  Strip off that livery and get you gone.
  Because of faith that once I felt in you
  I cannot strike you now. But, O beware!
  For _he_ must meet me face to face alone.

RELIGION

  (_Struggling to free himself from Capital and escape_)

  If they would only listen to me, now--

FLIP

  But they will not, Blackcoat, no. I can make men behave a few minutes
  at a time because I amuse them. One would think your derivative
  graces almost funny enough to serve the same purpose. But men do not
  want _you_ to be funny. They would have you large and majestic, and
  to-day you do not seem big enough to enforce attention from any but an
  audience of corpses. These two, Labor and Capital, are not corpses,
  but red-blooded men, having given themselves over to the same
  ha----fair lady, Trade. Unless you can regain your lost stature your
  day is over, Blackcoat, over. But do your best, for we still need you.

RELIGION

  Then will I call my bastard brother Cult,
  To help me out and to abate this strife--
  O Cult, come hither, I have need of you.

  (_Enter Cult in fantastic costume, carrying a crystal into which he
  gazes. He walks slowly, with an air of craft and mystery, and speaks
  in a droning monotone._)

CULT

  Abracadabra--someone spoke my name--
  The aura that I wear about me shivered
  As if for vocal contact. I am here.

  (_While Cult is speaking Trade comes slyly forward from the back,
  where she has been sitting, watching in disdainful amusement, and
  gradually draws nearer to the sleeping Mars._)

RELIGION

  (_to Cult_)

  Brother, I need you here to stop a fight;
  Labor and Capital--

CULT

  Hush--I know all.
  I sense a mystery hidden in the brush--
  I feel, feel, feel, who am so sensitive.
  I will look through my crystal till I find it,
  And when I find it, that will stop the fight!

FLIP

  Abracadabra! He would look through a crystal to find what is hidden in
  brush and pumpkins.

  (_Trade seats herself on the shield of Mars and lights a cigarette_)

LABOR

  Enough of nonsense. I am not a child
  That I should swallow all this mystic mush.
  If old Religion were what once he seemed,
  He never would have called on you, O Cult.

  (_Labor takes a step toward Capital again, and Religion makes a
  gesture of appeal to Flip._)

FLIP

  Blackcoat, there is no use. There is but one enemy who can drain them
  of their feverish passions and so reconcile them, the same who lies
  sleeping under the brush in the corner. He has slept long, and while
  he has been sleeping, women have indulged their husbands and borne too
  many children, and the world is full to overflowing; men have indulged
  their families in new luxuries of all kinds. All fear temperance as
  they fear death, for, like death it curbs desire. The Soul of Man, of
  whom we constantly hear, has not yet made himself conspicuous,
  although the women’s clubs claim to know all about him. But, if the
  enemy should awaken--

  (_Mars stirs in his sleep_)

CULT

  (_Looking in another direction through his crystal_)

  I see it in my glass that he is dead--

  (_Trade, leaning over Mars, and glancing back at the others
  maliciously, drops her cigarette on Mars and awakens him. Mars sits
  up and looks about._)

CULT

  (_without seeing Mars and going off at right_)

  By all the initiates, my aura feels
  The pressure of the knowledge of his death
  Who was the olden enemy. I know all....

  (_Mars rises and shakes his spear. Exeunt all the others, Capital and
  Labor in alarm, Religion timidly, Flip with a philosopher’s shrug,
  Trade laughing contemptuously._)

  (_The sky grows dark and Mars strides up and down, singing or
  chanting and shaking his spear._)

MARS

  Long have I slept, but now have I awakened,
  I, mighty Mars, the lover of the arrow,
  I, mighty Mars, the giver of the sabre,
  I, mighty Mars, the maker of the shrapnel,
  Monarch of heroes, gallantry and death.

  I am a spirit of man’s body gendered,
  And, in the race, I am for everlasting,
  Calling mankind from home and task and kindred,
  Making men mad with foaming blood-delight.
  Kings I have kissed, with Victory and solace;
  Kings I have ruined. Who can stand beside me?
  Who is strong to quell me? Let him show his face?

  Long have I slept, while Trade, the busy harlot,
  Kept her delights for Capital and Labor;
  Now let the whirr of singing mills be silent!
  Now let the factory whistles hush their voices!
  Now let the harvests in the fields be rotted!
  Now let the shops be shut, the churches empty,
  That I may fill them with my sick and dying--
  Mine is dominion over day and night.

  Night is at hand, and, in The World Inn feasting
  Sitteth mankind, while I am keeping vigil.
  Such blood is rich--the sweeter for my drinking--
  Yea, I am avid of the fat of babies--
  None will I have but such as are the strongest--
  Cleanest and truest, proudest, richest, bravest--
  (Never a weakling can abide my presence
  For I am Mars, and speak the word of death)
  Lo! I will call my servants to my colors--
  One deed of fury licks a world to ashes--
  Bright, blasting winds sweep over croft and hearthside
  Leaving life dead. Who comes to challenge me?

SOUL OF MAN

  I challenge you, O Mars, though straitly bound.
  Lo! I shall break with love your ugly power.

MARS

  A slave who would defy his conqueror!
  Why, I did bind you with resistless chains
  Long centuries ago when earth was young.

SOUL OF MAN

  I have grown strong since then.

MARS

  Not strong enough.
  For I have wakened from my years of rest
  As zealous as a child to play his game,
  And you, not I, shall feel the limits of time
  Grow thin and sag and break beneath your form,
  Letting you fall into annihilation
  Through crackling fringes of what might have been.

SOUL OF MAN

  You rave, O Mars. What ravels with my weight
  Would break with yours, and yet this ancient stuff,
  This fibre of the human race is strong.
  You have most straitly bound, who cannot slay,
  That I might work the less in your long sleep,
  You, drunk with blood of lovers, satiate
  With rape of many women! Yet men grow
  And love you less than when your sleep began....

  (_He struggles to free himself from his bonds, fails, in the attempt,
  falls forward on his face, groans. Mars laughs._)

MARS

  Now I have need of my good servant, Science.
  Ho! Science!

  (_Enter Science in the costume of the laboratory with a test tube in
  his hand._)

SCIENCE

  Yes, mighty Mars, I am here.

MARS

  Science, once more I have great need of you.
  I want the howitzers of Titan gods,
  And mad torpedoes mightier than of old,
  And airy fleets to rend the dizzy Heavens,
  Zeppelins and lighter craft, ill-omened birds
  To prey upon the towns that lie below;
  And I want wicked, wondrous submarines,
  Sly, devilish monsters of the deeps unknown,
  And battle cruisers ruinous and grim.
  Make me a ration that will keep men strong
  The longer for their task of blood and tears,
  Which is my game, my spectacle, my joy.
  And find me doctors, apt with splintered bones,
  And keen to cut the rotten flesh from sound,
  And to sew bodies up like burlap sacks
  That they may keep their contents still secure.
  What say you, Science, will you serve me still?

SCIENCE

  You know I am a neutral servant, Mars,
  To whomsoever can command my laws.
  I have not much emotion for a choice.
  Yet, were I free, to-day, I would say no;
  For I have great discoveries at heart
  And great experiments have undertaken
  Which yet may bring milleniums to men,
  Which must be interrupted if I yield.
  Therefore I would return to my own task,
  And yet, if Capital and Labor will it,
  I must obey you. I must do your will.

MARS

  Labor and Capital!

  (_Enter Labor and Capital, still sullen_)

  I must have war;
  Capital you must fight to save your own
  In every separate nation where you dwell.
  You, Labor, in all lands that you call home,
  Must fight to guard it, and acquit you well.

LABOR

  I like it not at all!

CAPITAL

  No more do I!

LABOR

  I wanted Trade, and peace.

CAPITAL

  And I the same.

LABOR

  And we had questions of our own to settle,
  This Capital and I. Not yet, old Mars!

MARS

  Ay, now. Why Capital, you have grown so great
  You can work wonders over all the world.
  Have you no pride, O Labor? Such a hero,
  With such great shoulders and such stalwart thighs,
  With such swart manhood and such virile temper,
  Meseems should hear my mandate with more joy.
  For both of you can learn the way of fighting
  And better settle your own private quarrel
  For lessons stern that I alone can teach you.

  (_Labor and Capital turn toward each other and take a step or two
  away from Mars. They are muttering and murmuring together as Flip
  enters._)

FLIP

  May Heaven have mercy on the sheepskin degree I cribbed for in
  college! What say the sages? A common fear unites foes of long
  standing. And here, verily, are Labor and Capital discoursing
  earnestly together like young brides on the subject of biscuits. Are
  you, then, the cause of their peace, O Mars?

MARS

  Well asked. Indeed they are too much afraid
  To seem like men. Men used to be more bold
  When I was young. When earth was young with me
  They were not cowards--

LABOR AND CAPITAL

  (_wheeling about angrily_)

  Nor are we cowards today!

FLIP

  More than a coward would fear you, master of blood-suckers. I like
  you not myself. I have come to distract you a moment from your fell
  intention. If I were forced to do military service I should hope to
  eschew your company, albeit you have taken your place in history as
  a celebrity, some lion, take it from me. But, roar as you will, I
  won’t invite you to my dinner parties. Nor could you convert me to
  your cause, for I am always ready to see both sides of a question, to
  embrace both ladies at once, as it were, with equal ardor and love.
  Apropos of that, friend Mars, a flea in your ear!...

MARS

  Talk if you must, but do not talk too long....

FLIP

  (_speaking rapidly--even earnestly_)

  If you raise hob now, it will not add to your popularity one whit.
  There is nothing but stage bombast to fight about. There is a little
  need of Capital for expansion, and of Labor for more bread, since
  he breeds fifty per cent. too fast. There is the hope of enlarging
  certain rooms in The World Inn to accommodate more strangers, or else
  of reducing the number of travellers who wish to sojourn therein. But
  you are not essential in the development of these designs, nor will
  they give you a good background for the acting of melodrama. You
  cannot shout “God and the right!” as you did in the days when you were
  popular and more or less necessary. To-day you are a bluff and we know
  it. So does your enemy, one Soul of Man, a personage as yet invisible
  to me, who may one day dissolve even my divine impudence into prudent
  beauty and make a hymnal out of my wit. With this thought I leave you.
  Look well before you leap, you heavy-weight. You may land in the
  trenches!

  (_Exit Flip_)

MARS

  He talks too much. I live for gallant deeds!
  You fellows here were arguing with me
  About my war. I will have your consent--
  They would be cowards who would answer nay....

  (_Reenter Flip_)

FLIP

  Here is The Daily Bewilderer running headlines that will delight you,
  O Mars. Somebody has shot an arch-duke somewhere. Now, indeed, we
  shall be unable to hold you back! Now indeed we have fine cause for
  war!

LABOR AND CAPITAL

  (_going rapidly to Mars_)

  We are not cowards. We serve you, mighty Mars.

MARS

  My shield, my spear! Now am I well content.
  Go, Science, and prepare for this great war
  As Capital and Labor shall agree,
  And send me Poetry, my ancient friend!

  (_Exeunt Science, Labor, Capital, and Flip. Enter Poetry._)

MARS

  Poetry, it was you, who made my fame,
  Who taught the people all the best of me--

POETRY

  Mars, I shall sing your praises nevermore,
  Nor shall the people need you evermore.
  I sing the people, as I always have,
  And, as they change, the new song of new times.
  Who till The World Field for the harvest’s sake
  And feast in The World Inn at set of sun,
  And mate with healthy joy in one another,
  And gladly breed the children of the flesh
  And of the spirit, and who build our homes,
  Who cleanse and fashion, and repair your wrongs,
  These are my folk, and their new songs I sing,
  And a new era, burning bright with peace.

  (_A chain breaks and frees the right arm of Soul of Man, who extends
  it in blessing toward Poetry._)

SOUL OF MAN

  O Poetry, your word has broken bonds
  Forged long ago when earth was very young.
  Sing you for me till you and I together
  Shall leaven all this lump of humankind
  With the new yeast of kindly brotherhood.
  We’ll purge the old earth of this festering fear
  And heal this cancer! Poetry, sing on!

MARS

  (_scornfully, to Poetry_)

  I need you not, then. I can do without you
  If I have Music and her seducer, Glamour.
  Come, Music!

  (_Exit Poetry. Enter Music, in bonds to Glamour._)

GLAMOUR

  I brought her in. She would have stayed behind
  To sing with Poetry for all mankind.
  But, once deceived, she can go free no more
  Save in the triumph of the Soul of Man,
  Who is your thrall. Come, Music, my good wench,
  Tell Mars your service and your song are his.

MUSIC

  If I must give myself against my will
  And where my instinct would make swift refusal,
  I will so give myself through Mars to men
  That, treading in his flashing path of pain,
  They shall know less of him because of me.
  And I shall be their glory when his guns
  Vomit black horror upon body and soul,
  And I shall be their solace in the hours
  When stiffening Death would have them for his own.
  Oh woe is me that listened unto Glamour!
  Yet I await your freedom, Soul of Man.

MARS

  Tush, girl, a beauty like your precious self
  Has ever need of a more lusty lover--
  And such am I, and such is Glamour here!
  What captive can a woman’s kisses keep?
  Come, take my kiss, and then, throughout the world,
  Sing me the ballads that do make men wild!
  Give me the froward chanteys of the camp,
  Beat me the marches unto Victory,
  Or, with bravado, even unto Death.
  Come, come; begin. The whole world waits for you!

  (_Music wipes tears from her eyes and sets a bugle to her lips. Exit
  Music, sounding the advance, followed by Glamour. Then in close
  succession and increasing volume are heard the national anthems of
  the warring nations of Europe, in the order in which they declared
  war. It is dark and lights flash out in the distance. There is more
  or less noise and confusion at the back. Horses, artillery, men,
  crossing and recrossing, running, marching, working. Mars, proudly
  erect in the center shouts “Good!” and repeats it. A man, marching
  in with others, leaves his group and runs to the steps of The World
  Inn._)

THE MAN

  Are you there, dear? I have come to say farewell!

A WOMAN

  (_coming out to meet him._)

  Beloved, must you go? I am alone,
  Alone in all the world, and of our love
  A child, a little human flower is coming--
  Surely I need you most!

THE MAN

  Tell him his father tried to do his duty
  And loved his country. Dear one, I must go....

  (_They kiss passionately and the man rejoins his group and marches
  off. The woman flings herself down on the steps of The World Inn and
  weeps bitterly. There is more noise and confusion and then three
  youths come to the steps and call out._)

THREE YOUTHS

  Mother.... O Mother.... Mother!

  (_A woman comes forward holding wide arms for the three_)

THE WOMAN

  Children, you are not going--you, my babies?
  It seems but yesterday my body held you--
  It seems but yesterday your toys were lying,
  Toy cannon and bright soldiers made of tin
  Upon the cottage floor. O children, children,
  Who are just old enough at last to leave me--
  Surely you will not leave your poor old mother?

ONE BOY

  The bugle called us and we must be going--

THE WOMAN,

  A bugle calls more strongly than a mother....

THE SECOND BOY

  We will come back to you as heroes, mother....

THE WOMAN,

  You were my heroes when you were my babies....

THE THIRD BOY

  You would not have us cowards to be near you....

THE WOMAN,

  I am Love’s coward--I never ... should ... have ... made you....

  (_The lads kiss their mother and tear themselves from her arms. The
  anthems of the nations are repeated. The guns volley in the distance,
  getting louder and louder. Fires flame up and there is more or less
  noise and confusion. A woman runs out from The World Inn, sobbing._)

THE WOMAN,

  I want my lover who was never mine.
  Will they not let him come to say farewell?
  Where are you, O Desired of all my days?

  (_She runs hither and thither looking for him, wildly, and finally
  stumbles against Mars, shrieks, and tries to escape, but is caught
  and held by him. Mars roars his elation and carries her off at left
  screaming. There is a pause, utter quiet, absolute darkness. Then
  Mars returns alone and stumbles into The World Inn._)

MARS

  Now I can feast me to my full content,
  And then, a little while, I shall have rest.

  (_Exit Mars. There is another pause and silence while it gradually
  becomes lighter. Men and women are heard groaning, and, in the pale,
  eerie light, weird moth-like figures, like ghosts of the dead, flit
  here and there across the field. When it becomes light enough to
  see, all the world is changed. Flowers, fruit, produce are gone. The
  wagon that held the grain is now filled with corpses. On the ground
  are the sick and wounded, bandaged. The women waiting on them are
  lean, ragged, haggard. A few children are huddled together in silent
  terror. The scene is blackened as if by fire. On the steps of The
  World Inn sits The Old Mother, as in the beginning._)

A WOMAN

  The dawn is nearly here, the strange grey dawn!

ANOTHER WOMAN

  What bodes it now? Sunset or dawn or noon
  Are all alike to those who have seen hell
  And bear in body and soul the brand of sorrow.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  ’Twas even as I feared and as I spoke.
  So was it, children, in my younger days,
  The days that I can nevermore forget.

  (_She rises and hobbles toward the wounded men._)

  Children of mothers’ flesh this cannot last
  Forever. I am old and soon I die,
  And nothing can torment me very long,
  Wherefore I speak what youth might fear to say
  To you, as to my sons of long ago,
  Who died, as all your friends have died, in war.

A MAN

  Speak, for we listen.

THE OLD MOTHER,

  That is very well,
  For this is murder that ye did commit,
  For glamour and for vanity and lust,
  For selfishness in trade, and for all freedom
  To breed your own kind over all the earth,
  Each for himself and his own kind alone,
  Forgetting that ye all have suckled mothers,
  Forgetting that ye owe us fealty,
  And that ye owe it to yourselves to be
  Staunch farmers of the World Field, and good friends,
  One flesh, one love, one state, one family.

A MAN

  Even that we might be able to achieve
  If one would help us to the holy way.
  We fight not for ourselves, good mother, no!
  We fight for place, for honor and for home,
  For what the great, who lead us, say is best,
  The whims of senators, the dreams of kings;
  And often know not why our blood is poured,
  A turbulent, unholy river of lust.
  And when the people cry for war and shout
  The sure destruction of another nation
  It is because they fear and know that fear
  Is far more terrible than roughest strife.
  Nor are we fools to give up life with joy,
  Save when the feud of Capital and Labor
  Has made our minds a Hell of sordid warfare
  And clothed our gayety in querulous crepe.
  Then, in our desperate mourning for young joy,
  The sweetness and variety of life,
  The rainbow radiance and the cloth of gold
  That are youth’s great inalienable right,
  We know no other way and follow blindly
  The one mad way that gives a thrill of glory,
  And frees our pulsing life. So are we made....
  But we, who lie on beds of bloody sweat,
  Washed by our women’s tears, we fain would see
  Another era of mankind made new,
  Young Titans, strong enough to war on war,
  This hoary curse from the stringy throat of Mars
  To answer and to silence and to choke!

OTHER MEN

  Mother, the way--the upward way from Hell!

THE OLD MOTHER,

  I’ll show it, thankfully, and, if I do,
  I can go gaily, gladly to my grave
  As one who treads a quickstep of her youth.
  See, children, that strange figure, Soul of Man,
  In bonds to our arch enemy and his?
  He is our friend, and all our life would share
  If we would only take him for our own.
  There is no morning made by sun and sea
  And towering mountains, larksong, flower breath
  And rapture, but his coming into it
  Can give a finer and diviner joy.
  There is no darkness, damp and fraught with death,
  Down-bearing, stifling, but his coming makes
  A rift of light, an easement of the strain.
  Now Mars, his foe, is held in ugly sleep,
  Full-fed on thin, raw flesh of women’s babes,
  Deep drunken on the sap of many hearts--
  Be not deceived, for he will wake again,
  Unless ye learn of this good Soul of Man
  How to defy this Mars, and get you peace.
  Children, commend you to the Soul of Man.

A MAN

  How can we free you, free you, Soul of Man?

SOUL OF MAN

  I tremble--for my hour of joy is near....
  Ah, can it be that I shall rise at last,
  Gay winged and glorious with the rising sun,
  To hover where mankind shall bloom anew
  In The World Field where only stubble was?
  Hearken! For now, together ye must go,
  Not here a few and there a few, but all,
  And hale him forth, this monster butcher, now,
  While he is full and has no lust to feed,
  Yes, hale him forth into the light and look,
  And looking, know him truly as he is.
  If for that look he wake, defy his power,
  For your own sakes fight one more fight for peace.

A MAN

  Alas, we are too weak for this god Mars,
  And some of us have known him all too well.

SOUL OF MAN

  Who does my bidding has no sense of fear--
  For all the stars will shine into his night
  And all the winds acclaim him to the end.
  And this was true of Socrates and Christ,
  Of Lincoln and of all great harvesters
  In The World Field. It shall be so for you
  On the same terms of brave obedience.
  Do ye my bidding and ye shall be free
  And I, to live and grow with you, forever.

  (_The people talk together in twos and threes. Enter Capital and
  Labor, two lean cripples supporting one another, followed by Flip,
  who is wearing deep mourning._)

SOUL OF MAN

  Labor and Capital, be well content
  To lend me but yourselves. I ask no money.
  I lay no tax upon you as did Mars.
  And I do promise you an opulent peace,
  Wrought out with right goodwill between you soon
  For I know well what others do not know,
  But should discover by your present plight,
  That you must ever win or lose together,
  Sharing each other’s burden and reward
  And I do promise sweet regeneration
  Your broken selves shall be made whole again
  When you have helped the people set me free....

  (_Capital and Labor discuss the offer._)

FLIP

  What will you do for me, O Soul of Man, whom I can see and perceive
  at last? I have lost many rich relations in this war and profited
  nothing--wherefore I wear mourning! But if I turn my wit to good
  account by making men’s anger funny, what will you do for me?

SOUL OF MAN

  Your name, I’ll change, and you yourself, good Flip,
  You shall be my own Humor, kindly spoken,
  And my strong Reason leading men to Truth--
  But look who comes with face of Galahad
  And thews of Ajax, wearing spotless white--

  (_Enter Religion, a new personality, athletic and beautiful, wearing
  a short white garment with the symbols of the great religions wrought
  in gold upon the hem and carrying a shining cross. All the people
  turn and look and with one accord make obeisance._)

THE PEOPLE

  Religion.... O Religion.... Religion!

SOUL OF MAN

  Religion, have you come to serve the people?

LABOR

  (_joyfully_)

  Are you the old guest, radiant and serene?

CAPITAL

  And will you lead against this bully, Mars?

RELIGION

  Listen, for with new power I come to you
  Seeking to serve, claiming a mighty task.
  I was a sinner who had nibbled Truth
  And let its sweetness all dissolve away
  Into the rancid spittle of dead dogmas.
  The loss of your allegiance was the stroke
  That cleansed and chastened me. I have spewed out
  All the old wordy liquor of dead days,
  And all the prowess of my being now
  Shall foster and defend the Soul of Man.

  (_The people cheer. A chain breaks, releasing the left arm of Soul of
  Man who reaches out both arms in benediction._)

SOUL OF MAN

  Then welcome, and thrice welcome, good Religion--
  Coming to serve, men will be glad to follow.
  O happy folk of ages yet to be
  New flowering from the pollen of the past,
  I see your budding glory everywhere.
  This is the spring and this the shining dawn--
  The men shall be as great grave trees at rest
  With the new strength that grapples, grows, and gives,
  And the world’s women even as her men,
  And fruitful as the orchards of the valley,
  And little children dancing with delight
  Shall blossom fearlessly, in perfect grace,
  Like windblown poppies nodding in the sun.
  And all The World Field shall be cropped in peace
  And all the sheaves of life shall be brought home--
  Such fruitage for High God is in your lives
  As I had never dreamed in life’s beginning.
  This is the dawn, the spring, and we are planting
  The harvest that the race shall gather in.
  Therefore to Mars, and quickly bring him hither!

  (_Religion and The Old Mother lead the people up the steps and into
  The World Inn, the people cheering and shouting. Then there is a
  moment of silence, after which they come out again, carrying the dead
  body of Mars._)

A MAN

  He is dead, old Mars, and must have died of fear!

  (_The chains drop from the body of Soul of Man, and he, leaping to
  his feet, runs to take his place in the center, in front of the
  body of Mars and in a widening semi-circle of the people. His black
  garment falls on Mars, and Soul of Man is transfigured, a radiant
  figure in blue and gold and crimson, with flaming wings rising behind
  him and above. The people, also, are glorified by the rising of the
  sun behind them. They kneel._)

  (_There is heard the triumphant singing of “The Hallelujah Chorus”_).


CURTAIN




  _Published and for sale by_

  MARGUERITE WILKINSON

  CORONADO, CAL.

  Price, 50 cents, postpaid




EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS OF “IN VIVID GARDENS”


“A rich contralto voice singing out of the deepest experiences of
life.”--_Poetry._

“The emotions are human, lofty and honorable; their voicing is sincere,
passionate, and at times exalted.”--_Twentieth Century Magazine._

“Few of the modern poets can so easily convince the doubting ones of
the necessity of their vocation as the author of this slender volume of
verse.”--_Chicago Daily News._

“Aside from their poetic beauty, the verses possess a dignity,
wholesomeness and outspoken valiance that carry conviction. Sincerity
is their dominant note; they are the utterance of one who has heard
‘the quiet but far-reaching voice of truth.’”--_The Craftsman._

“The vigor of its thought raises it above questions of technique, and
it is poetry unquestionably, inevitably, simply because it is the
authentic voice of womanhood proclaiming itself in the unfaltering
accents of real passion.”--Harold Monro in _The Poetry Review_ (London,
1912).

“Sincere, unconventional, forthright verse.”--_The Oakland Enquirer._

“A human document, even a social document.”--_The New York Times._

“Distinctly worthy of note.”--_Chicago Record-Herald._

“Here is a new song under the sun, a woman’s love song which neither
pretends to be a man’s love song, nor confines itself to feelings
which most men are accustomed to think of women as having. It is
solar, not lunar; it is clear with its own light and warm with its own
fire.”--_The Chicago Evening Post._

“The poems in this volume are as meat and wine to literary
tastes.”--_Albany Times-Union._

“Not only do we have the woman spirit here, but a poetical spirit of no
mean sort.”--_Zion’s Herald._

“It is clear, true poetry, without aping, effusiveness, or striving
for effect; the refraction of momentous personal experience through
a richly-dowered soul. It is also precious as an exquisite voicing
of pure womanliness in its highest phase. It is worthy not only to
be enjoyed, but to be studied as a clue to the soul of the coming
woman.”--Edward A. Ross, Author of “Sin and Society,” “The Changing
Chinese,” etc., etc.

“No clearer voice than that of Marguerite Wilkinson sings today of
the coming woman and of the democracy we are working for. ‘In Vivid
Gardens,’ a glimpse into the souls of women, was her first book of
poems.”--_Life and Labor._


  “In Vivid Gardens,” Sherman, French & Co., Publishers, Boston







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSING OF MARS: A MODERN MORALITY PLAY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


