The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Stocking-Knitter's Manual: A Handy Book for the Work-Table
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Stocking-Knitter's Manual: A Handy Book for the Work-Table

Author: Mrs. George Cupples

Release date: June 4, 2018 [eBook #57273]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Fay Dunn, John Campbell and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOCKING-KNITTER'S MANUAL: A HANDY BOOK FOR THE WORK-TABLE ***




Produced by Fay Dunn, John Campbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  The Table of Contents has been created by the Transcriber.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




JOHNSTONE, HUNTER, & CO.'S

Series of Half-Crown Volumes.

EXTRA FOOLSCAP 8vo, HANDSOMELY BOUND IN CLOTH.


_Those marked thus * are also kept in gilt edges, price 3s. each._


  *1. Rosa Lindesay, the Light of Kilmain. By M. H., Editor of 'The
  Children's Hour.' Illustrated.

  *2. Newlyn House, the Home of the Davenports. By A. E. W.
  Illustrated.

  *3. Alice Thorne; or, A Sister's Work. Illustrated.

  *4. Labourers in the Vineyard. By M. H., Editor of 'The
  Children's Hour.' Illustrated.

  *5. The Children of the Great King. By M. H., Editor of 'The
  Children's Hour.' Illustrated.

  *6. Little Harry's Troubles. By the Author of 'Gottfried of the
  Iron Hand.' Illustrated.

  *7. Sunday School Photographs. By the Rev. Alfred TAYLOR,
  Bristol, Pennsylvania.

  *8. Waymarks for the Guiding of Little Feet. By the Rev. _J. A.
  Wallace_.

  *9. The Domestic Circle; or, The Relations, Responsibilities, and
  Duties of Home Life. By the Rev. JOHN THOMSON. Illustrated.

  *10. Select Christian Biographies. By the Rev. James GARDNER,
  A.M., M.D. Illustrated.

  11. Ocean Lays. Selected by the Rev. J. Longmuir, LL.D.
  Illustrated.

  12. Wilberforce's Practical View of Christianity. New and
  Complete Edition.

  13. Communion Services, according to the Presbyterian Form. By
  the Rev. J. A. WALLACE.

  14. Attitudes and Aspects of the Divine Redeemer. By the Rev. J.
  A. WALLACE.

  15. The Redeemer and the Redemption. By the Rev. ALEX. S
  PATTERSON, D.D.

  16. A Pastor's Legacy. Edited by Rev. J. A. Wallace.




  THE

  STOCKING-KNITTER'S MANUAL.

  A Handy Book for the Work-Table.

  BY
  MRS. GEORGE CUPPLES.

  EDINBURGH:
  JOHNSTONE, HUNTER, AND CO.

[Illustration:(Publisher's Colophon)]




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

  Preface                                             3

  Directions for Working the different parts
        of a Stocking                                 5

  Stockings                                          11

  Socks                                              26

  Open-Work Patterns                                 29




PREFACE.


These Patterns were compiled for the benefit of a friend, who had
some pupils; and she having found them of service, and a saving of
time, when engaged in teaching others, the writer has ventured to
lay them before the public, in the hope that they may be of further
use.

Now that so much time is occupied with the higher branches of
education, and only an hour or so allotted to instruction in
sewing, knitting, etc., the pupil leaves school in general with a
very imperfect understanding of how to shape a stocking. It is not
always convenient to get an old woman to assist at the 'turning
of the heel;' and many parents cannot themselves knit--the last
generation being sadly behind in this simple but useful art.

The present manual is intended for the benefit of those who already
know a little about stocking-knitting, but who are not very sure of
their own unassisted powers; and it will also prove serviceable to
the teacher, as she may see at a glance how many stitches, etc.,
to cast on for the different sizes required by her pupils. In
following the directions here given, the young knitter is advised
not to be alarmed at the appearance of the stocking when first cast
on, imagining that it is too wide; for as the knitting advances,
the work becomes tighter of itself, till the top-band is finished.
Besides, it is necessary to have a good many stitches on at first,
which are gradually to be taken in during the process of shaping
the leg, as the stocking is much narrower at the ankle than at the
top.

Though the loom has done away in a great measure with the
importance of stocking-knitting, still it is a pleasant and
profitable, if homely, accomplishment; and, moreover, a fruitful
resource, by way of pastime, for old age. It is to be hoped that at
no time will this thrifty household acquirement be allowed to fall
into disuse, for the sake of more ornamental occupations.

It may be interesting to know, that the art of knitting is first
noticed about the sixteenth century; and, according to some,
originated in Scotland, whence it found its way into France. It is
related that, in 1564, a certain Wm. Ryder, an apprentice of Master
Thomas Burdett, having seen accidentally, in the shop of an Italian
merchant, a pair of knitted worsted stockings, made a pair exactly
like them, which he presented to William, Earl of Pembroke, and
that these were the first stockings knitted in England of woollen
yarn.

Though the open-work patterns are not taken directly from any book,
the writer feels bound to acknowledge, that she is much indebted
to the instruction she herself received, through a valued teacher,
from Mrs. Gaugain's excellent _Knitting and Crochet Book_, which
is, however, too well known to require any recommendation.

  A. J. C.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




THE

STOCKING-KNITTER'S MANUAL.

Directions for Working the different parts of a Stocking.


=The Leg.=--The shaping of this part of the stocking is effected by
means of 'intakes,' which are made by slipping off the 3d stitch on
the right hand side of the seam-stitch without knitting it; then
knit the next stitch, and take the slipped stitch over it; knit the
next. On the left side, knit the 1st, slip the 2d, knit the 3d, and
take the slipped stitch over. The rounds that are knitted between
each intake must be quite distinct from it; that is, the round with
the intakes on it is not to be counted. To make a good stocking, it
is necessary to be particular with this part, that the shaping may
be gradual.


=The Heel.=--When the ankle is finished, divide the stitches on
to three of the knitting needles. Put one half of the stocking on
to one needle, with the seam-stitch in the centre, and divide the
other half equally on to the other two needles. For instance, if
there be 61 stitches on the round, place 15 on each side of the
seam-stitch--in all 31--on one needle, and 15 upon each of the
other two. These two short rows are left till the heel is done. The
long row should now be knitted 1 plain row, turn back, and knit it
pearl. Work thus till a sufficient length is worked, being careful
to slip off the first stitch of each row without knitting, as these
form the stitches to be lifted in forming the foot. The top of the
heel can now be worked in any of the different modes now described.


=French Heel.=--Begin it with the plain row, slip the stitch next
the seam-stitch on the left side, knit the 2d, take the slipped
stitch over, and knit the next, turn back, and knit 2 pearl and the
seam-stitch. Then pearl 2 stitches together, knit 1 pearl and turn
back. On the next row, slip the 2d stitch on the left of the seam,
and knit the next; take it over, and knit 1 plain stitch, turn
back, always increasing 1 stitch on each side of the seam-stitch.
When the heel is required to be wide, this pattern is very suitable.


=Dutch Heel.=--Slip the 5th stitch on the left side of the seam,
knit the 6th, and take the slipped stitch over; turn back, and
pearl the 5th and 6th together, at the other side. In small
stockings, the 3d and 4th stitches; this makes a tighter heel.


=Common Heel.=--After a sufficient number of rows are knitted in
the length of the heel, cast off the stitches, and sew it up very
carefully. Though some people like it, it is not so suitable as the
other two, as the sewing is apt to hurt the foot.


=Preparations for Knitting the Foot.=--Having finished the heel,
proceed to pick up the stitches at the edge, beginning at the left
side, with the needle on which the heel stitches are, knitting
them as you lift them. With the fourth needle work off all the
stitches on the two front needles. Now pick up the stitches on the
right side of the heel; and having done that, work with the same
needle to the centre of the heel. The seam-stitch is stopped here.
In picking up the stitches, those that were left after knitting the
top should be counted in. For example, if 30 stitches are required,
and 9 have been left on each side of the seam, pick up only 21 on
each side. The stocking is now in position for forming the gusset.


=The 'Gusset' of the Foot.=--Having picked up the stitches, and
knitted round again to the right hand side of the back of the foot,
knit the 1st stitch, slip the 2d, knit the 3d, and take the slipped
stitch over. On the left hand needle, slip the 3d last stitch, knit
the next, and take the slipped stitch over, and knit the last. Knit
a plain round between every intake.

  NOTE.--In knitting the plain part of the foot, leave off working
  the seam-stitch, and if the work should appear loose at the
  beginning or ends of the needles, change the stitches by knitting
  off a few on to the neighbouring needle; but care should be taken
  to replace them in the same position as they were in at the
  finishing of the gusset, as the intakes must correspond exactly
  with the back intakes of the toe.


=Another Way.=--Having picked up the stitches, work 3 stitches
off the first front needle. Then take another needle, and work
off all the stitches on the two front needles, with the exception
of the 3 last. With another needle work off the 3 left stitches,
and proceed to pick up the right side of the heel. In doing the
intakes, knit together the 3d and 4th last stitches on the left
side of the heel, and on the right slip the 3d. Knit the 4th,
and take the slipped stitch over. Put back the 3 stitches after
finishing the gusset.


=Another Way of Turning the Heel and Knitting the Gusset.=--_This
mode is recommended where the wearer has a high instep or a stout
foot._ In dividing the stitches for the heel, place from 4 to 8
stitches more, according to size, on the front of the foot, and
fewer on the heel. For example, if there are 89 stitches on, place
20 on each side of the seam, and 48 on the front of the foot.
Before beginning the intakes, increase 6 stitches on the 2d round
at the back of the foot. Begin to increase about the middle of the
left needle if the stocking is small, and a little nearer to the
end if a large one. Make 1, knit 3 stitches; make 1, knit 3; make
1, knit 3. Then knit across the front to the right side of the back
of the foot. Knit 3 plain, make 1; knit 3, make 1; knit 3, make 1.
Knit round to this corner, and begin the intakes, same as described
in either of the preceding ways. There will be from 4 to 8 stitches
more, after finishing the gusset, than at the ankle.


=The Toe.=--Begin the intakes at the right hand corner of the long
needle, or front of the foot. Knit the 1st, slip the 2d, knit the
3d, and take the slipped stitch over. Knit across to the end of the
row, slip the 3d last stitch; knit the 2d, and take the slipped
stitch over; knit the last. Do the same at the back, but only at
the right and left hand corners. There must be no intakes in the
centre of the foot. Proceed thus, with a plain round alternately,
till you have reduced it to the number specified in the Patterns.
Place the needles together, and work the front and the back rows
off at the same time. Then cast off with the next row.

  In measuring the work, use an inch measure, and lay the stocking
  under it flat on the table. Except where particularly specified,
  measure the leg independent of the top-band, and the foot from
  the last intake at the gusset.

  As children invariably knit tightly, the needles ought to be
  chosen of a size coarser, to obviate this tendency. If, however,
  they should happen to work loosely, it would be advisable to take
  the numbers specified in the patterns.

  If a strong heel is desired, use double worsted.


=Explanation how to increase a Stitch.=--To make the stitches
divide better for the heel, it is sometimes necessary to increase
one or two stitches. To do this: after drawing the worsted through
the stitch, put the needle in at the back of the same, as if to
pearl it, and draw the loop through it also, thus making two
stitches out of one.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




STOCKINGS.


=For an Infant.=--Knitted with merino wool--Needles, No. 18. Cast
on 80 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 pearl and 2 plain stitches
alternately. Knit 43 plain rounds, or 2 inches in length, with a
seam-stitch. Increase three stitches on second round (see page 9).
Now do the intakes.

  2 intakes with 6 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 7 rounds between each.
  2 intakes with 8 rounds between each.

This makes 14 intakes altogether--7 on each side of seam, and
reduces the stocking to 69. Knit 1¼ inches plain for length of
ankle. Divide the stitches, placing 17 on each side of seam-stitch,
and leaving 34 for front of the foot. Knit 23 rows for the heel,
plain and pearl alternately, or 1 inch; then knit the top,
according to directions (see page 6), and pick up the stitches for
the foot till there are 24 on each side of the seam, 7 being for
the gusset. When the gusset is done, there ought to be 69 stitches
on. Knit 2 together at back of the foot, to reduce it to an even
number. Knit 33 rounds plain, or 1½ inches in length. Knit the toe
(see page 8), and cast off with 10 stitches on each side the foot.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 56 stitches. Knit 16 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately, or 2 inches in length. Knit 31 plain rounds with a
seam-stitch. This brings to the 'intakes.' Make on each side of
seam,

  3 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 5 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 6 rounds between.

This makes 14 intakes--7 on each side, which reduces the stocking
to 42 stitches. Knit 19 plain rounds for the ankle, or 1¼ inches
in length. Divide the stitches, placing 10 on each side of seam,
leaving 21 for the front of the foot. Knit 14 rows, or 1 inch for
the heel, 7 plain and 7 pearl; then knit the top (see page 6), and
pick up the stitches at each side of heel till there are 15 on each
side of seam-stitch, 5 being for the gusset (see page 7). When
the gusset is finished, there ought to be 42 stitches on. Knit 23
rounds plain, or 1½ inches for foot. Knit the toe (see page 8), and
cast off with 8 stitches on each side of foot.


=For a Child 9 to 12 Months.=--Knitted with merino wool--Needles,
No. 18. Cast on 92 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl
stitches alternately. Knit 63 rounds plain, or 3 inches in length,
with a seam-stitch. Increase one stitch on the 1st round. Now begin
the 'intakes.' Make

  3 intakes on each side, with  7 rounds between.
  3     "       "         with  9 rounds between.
  3     "       "         with 10 rounds between.
  1     "       "         with 11 rounds between.

This makes 20 intakes altogether--10 on each side, and reduces
the stocking to 73 stitches. Knit 33 rounds, or 1½ inches, for
the ankle. Divide the stitches, placing 18 on each side of seam,
leaving 36 for the front of the foot. Knit 28 rows plain and pearl
alternately for the heel, or 1¼ inches. Knit the top (see page 6),
and pick up the stitches for the foot till there are 27 on each
side of seam-stitch, 9 being for the gusset (see page 7). When this
is done, there ought to be 73 stitches on. Knit 2 stitches together
to make an even number. Knit 43 plain rounds for foot, or 2 inches
in length. Knit the toe (see page 8), and cast off with 12 stitches.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 68 stitches. Knit 16 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 47 rounds plain, or 3 inches in length. Increase
2 stitches on second round. This brings on to the 'intakes.' Make
on each side of seam--

  2 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 5 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 7 rounds between.
  1 intake with 9 rounds between.

This makes 16 intakes altogether--8 on each side, reducing the
stocking to 54 stitches. Knit 23 rounds for ankle, or 1½--inches in
length. Divide the stitches, placing 13 on each side of the seam,
leaving 27 for front of the foot. Knit 19 rows plain and pearl
alternately for the heel, or 1¼ inches in length. Knit the top (see
page 6), and pick up the stitches for the foot till there are 18 on
each side of the seam, 5 being for the gusset (see page 7). When
the gusset is finished, there ought to be 54 stitches on. Knit 31
rounds, or 2 inches in length, for the foot; then knit the toe, and
cast off with 10 stitches on each side of foot.


=For a Child from 2 to 3 Years.=--Knitted with merino
wool--Needles, No. 18. Cast on 112 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2
plain and 2 pearl stitches alternately. Knit 88 plain rounds, or 4¼
inches in length. Increase 2 stitches on second round. Now begin
the intakes. Make on each side of seam--

  3 intakes with  5 rounds between.
  3 intakes with  6 rounds between.
  3 intakes with  8 rounds between.
  3 intakes with  9 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 10 rounds between.

This makes 28 altogether--14 on each side, and reduces the stocking
to 86 stitches. Knit 43 rounds, or 2 inches in length, for the
ankle. Divide the stitches, placing 22 on each side of the seam,
leaving 45 for the front of the foot. Knit 38 rows plain and pearl
alternately for length of the heel, or 1¾ inches. Knit the top (see
page 6), and pick up the stitches for the foot till there are 31 on
each side of seam-stitch, 9 being for the gusset (see page 7). When
the gusset is done, knit 53 rounds, or 2½ inches, for length of
foot, there being on 86 stitches when this is done. Knit the toe,
and cast off with 14 stitches.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 84 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 67 rounds plain, with a seam-stitch, increasing
2 on the second round, or 4¼ inches in length. Now begin the
'intakes.'

  3 intakes on each side, with 4 rounds between.
  4     "       "         with 5 rounds between.
  3     "       "         with 6 rounds between.
  2     "       "         with 8 rounds between.

This makes 24 intakes altogether--12 on each side, and reduces the
stocking to 62. Knit 31 rounds for the ankle, or 2 inches. Divide
the stitches, placing 15 on each side of the seam, leaving 31 for
front of the foot. Knit 22 rows plain and pearl alternately for the
heel, or 1½ inches in length. Knit the top (see page 6), and pick
up the stitches for the foot till there are 20 on each side of the
seam, 5 stitches being for the gusset (see page 7). When the gusset
is done, there ought to be 62 stitches on. Knit 39 rounds for
length of the foot, or 2½ inches. Knit the toe; and cast off with
14 stitches on each side of the foot.


=For a Child from 4 to 5 Years.=--Knitted with merino
wool--Needles, No. 18. Cast on 118. Knit 28 rounds, 2 plain and 2
pearl stitches alternately. Knit 108 rounds plain, or 5¼ inches in
length; increase 3 stitches on first and second rounds. Now begin
the intakes. On each side of seam make--

  3 intakes with 6 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 7 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 8 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 9 rounds between each.
  2 intakes with 10 rounds between each.

This makes 28 intakes altogether--14 on each side, and reduces the
stocking to 93. Knit 53 rounds for the ankle, or 2½ inches. Divide
the stitches, placing 23 on each side of seam, leaving 46 for front
of the foot. Knit 38 rows plain and pearl alternately for the heel,
or 1¾ inches in length. Knit the top, and pick up the stitches for
the foot, till there are 34 on each side of the seam, 11 stitches
being for the gusset; when the gusset is done, there ought to be 93
stitches on. Knit 2 stitches together at the back of the foot. Then
knit 63 rounds, or 3 inches, for the foot. Knit the toe, and cast
off with 11 stitches on each side.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 92 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 83 rounds plain, or 5¼ inches in length. Now
begin the intakes; on each side of seam--

  4 intakes with 5 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 6 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 7 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 8 rounds between each.

This makes 26 altogether--13 on each side of seam, reducing the
stocking to 66. Knit 39 rounds for the ankle, or 2½ inches. Divide
the stitches, placing 17 on each side of seam, leaving 33 for
front of the foot. Knit 27 rows, plain and pearl alternately, or
1¾ inches in length, for the heel. Then knit the top, and pick up
the stitches, till there are 25 on each side of seam-stitch--8
being for the gusset. When the gusset is done, there ought to be 66
stitches on. Knit 47 rounds for foot, or 3 inches. Knit the toe,
and cast off, with 12 stitches on each side.


=For a Child from 6 to 8 Years.=--Knitted with merino
wool--Needles, No. 18. Cast on 132 stitches. Knit 30 rounds, 2
plain and 2 pearl stitches alternately. Knit 128 rounds plain, or
6¼ inches in length, increasing 2 stitches on the second round. Now
begin the intakes--

  4 intakes on each side, with  6 rounds between each.
  3       "       "       with  7 rounds between   "
  3       "       "       with  8 rounds between   "
  3       "       "       with  9 rounds between   "
  3       "       "       with 10 rounds between   "

This makes 32 intakes--16 on each side, and reduces the stocking to
102 stitches. Knit 58 rounds for the ankle, or 2¾ inches in length.
Divide the stitches, placing 25 on each side of seam-stitch,
leaving 51 for front of the foot. Knit 43 rows for the heel, plain
and pearl alternately, or 2 inches. Knit the top (see page 6), and
pick up the stitches for the foot, till there are 39 on each side
of the seam, 14 being for the gusset. When the gusset is done,
there ought to be 102 stitches on. Knit 73 rounds, or 3½ inches in
length. Knit the toe, and cast off, with 16 on each side.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 100 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 99 rounds plain, or 6¼ inches; increase 1 stitch
on first round. Now begin the intakes. Make--

  5 intakes on each side, with 5 rounds between each.
  4       "       "       with 6 rounds between   "
  3       "       "       with 7 rounds between   "
  2       "       "       with 8 rounds between   "

This makes 28 altogether--14 on each side, and reduces the stocking
to 73. Knit 43 rounds for the ankle, or 2¾ inches. Divide the
stitches, placing 18 on each side of seam, leaving 36 for front of
the foot. Knit 31 rows, plain and pearl alternately, or 2 inches in
length, for the heel. Knit the top (see page 6), and pick up the
stitches, till there are 28 on each side of seam, 10 being for the
gusset. When this is done, there ought to be 73 stitches on. Knit 2
stitches together at the back, and knit 44 rounds for the foot, or
3 inches. Then knit the toe, and cast off, with 14 stitches on each
side.


=For the same.=--Lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn--Needles, No.
14. Cast on 66 stitches. Knit 20 rounds, 2 plain and 1 pearl
alternately. Knit 42 rounds plain, or 3½ inches in length. Increase
2 stitches at each side of the seam, with 7 or 8 rounds between
each, after the twenty-fourth round, or second inch. There will
then be 70 stitches on. Now begin the intakes.

  3 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 6 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 6 rounds between.

This makes 18 intakes altogether--9 on each side, and reduces the
stocking to 52. Knit 27 rounds, or 2¼ inches in length, for the
ankle. Divide the stitches, placing 12 on each side of the seam,
leaving 25 for the front of the foot. Knit 21 rows plain and pearl
alternately for the heel, or 1¾ inches in length. Knit the top, and
pick up the stitches for the foot till there are 19 on each side of
the seam, 7 being for the gusset. When the gusset is done, there
ought to be 52 stitches on. Knit 45 rounds, or 3¾ inches, for the
foot, measuring from the heel. Knit the toe, and cast off with 10
stitches on each side.


=For a Child from 8 to 12 Years.=--Lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.
Cast on 75 stitches. Knit 20 rounds, 2 plain and 1 pearl
alternately. Knit 60 rounds, or 5 inches in length. Increase 4
stitches at each side of the seam, with 5 or 6 rounds between each,
after knitting 24 rounds, or 2 inches, till there are 83 stitches
on. Now begin the intakes.

  5 intakes with 3 rounds between.
  6 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  1 intake  with 6 rounds between.

This makes 24 intakes altogether--12 on each side. Knit two
together to make an even number, reducing the stocking to 58.
Knit 36 rounds, or 3 inches, for the ankle. Divide the stitches,
placing 14 on each side of the seam, leaving 29 for front of foot.
Knit 24 rows for the heel, or 2 inches in length. Knit the top,
and pick up the stitches for the foot till there are 21 on each
side of the seam, 7 being for the gusset. When the gusset is done,
there ought to be 58 stitches. Knit 48 rounds for the foot, or 4
inches, measuring from the heel. Knit the toe, and cast off with 12
stitches.


=For a Child from 12 to 14 Years.=--Lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.
Cast on 84 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 1 pearl
alternately. Knit 78 rounds, or 6½ inches, increasing 4 stitches,
as in preceding pattern, till there are 92 stitches on. Now begin
the intakes.

  4 intakes with 3 rounds between.
  4 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 5 rounds between.

This makes 22 intakes altogether--11 on each side, and reduces the
stocking to 70. Knit 39 rounds for the ankle, or 3¾ inches. Divide
the stitches, placing 17 on each side of the seam, and leaving 35
for the front of the foot. Knit 27 rows for the heel, plain and
pearl alternately, or 2¼ inches in length. Then knit the top, and
pick up the stitches, 25 on each side of the seam, 8 being for the
gusset. When this is done, there ought to be 70 stitches on. Knit
57 rounds, or 4¾ inches, for the foot, measuring from the heel.
Knit the toe, and cast off with 14 on each side.


=Lady's Ordinary Size.=--Knitted with merino wool--Needles, No. 18.
Cast on 148 stitches. Knit 30 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 148 rounds plain, or 7¼ inches in length;
increase 1 stitch. Now begin the intakes; make on each side--

  3 intakes with  6 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with  7 rounds between each.
  4 intakes with  8 rounds between each.
  5 intakes with  9 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 10 rounds between each.

This makes 36 altogether--18 on each side of seam, and reduces
the stocking to 113. Knit 63 rounds for the ankle, or 3 inches in
length. Divide the stitches, placing 28 on each side of the seam,
and leaving 56 for front of the foot. Knit 48 rows, plain and pearl
alternately, or 2¾ inches, for the heel. Knit the top, and pick up
the stitches, till there are 44 on each side of the seam, 16 being
for the gusset. When the gusset is finished, there ought to be 113
stitches. Knit 2 together, and knit 88 rounds for the foot, or 4¼
inches. Knit the toe, and cast off, with 18 on each side.


=For the same.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16.
Cast on 112 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches
alternately. Knit 119 rounds plain, or 7½ inches in length. This
brings to the intakes. Make on each side--

  3 intakes with 4 rounds between each.
  4 intakes with 5 rounds between each.
  4 intakes with 6 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 7 rounds between each.
  3 intakes with 8 rounds between each.

This makes 34 altogether--17 on each side, and reduces the stocking
to 78. Knit 47 rounds, or 3 inches, for the ankle. Divide the
stitches, placing 19 on each side of the seam, leaving 39 for front
of the foot. Knit 35 rows, plain and pearl alternately, or 2¾
inches, for the heel. Knit the top, and pick up the stitches, till
there are 33 stitches on each side of the seam, 14 being for the
gusset. When the gusset is done, there ought to be 78 stitches on.
Knit 67 rounds plain for the foot, or 4¼ inches. Knit the toe, and
cast off, with 16 stitches on each side.


=Lady's Full Size.=--Knitted with fingering worsted--Needles, No.
16. Cast on 130 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 1 pearl
alternately. Knit 119 rounds, or 7½ inches. Increase 4 stitches,
knitting 4 rounds between each, beginning at the 71st round, or 4½
inches. There will now be 134 stitches on. Begin the intakes.

  6 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  5 intakes with 5 rounds between.
  4 intakes with 6 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 7 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 8 rounds between.

This makes 40 intakes altogether--20 on each side of the seam,
reducing the stocking to 90. Knit 55 rounds, or 3½ inches, for the
ankle. Divide the stitches, placing 22 on each side of the seam,
leaving 45 for the foot. Knit 47 rows for the heel, or 3 inches in
length. Knit the top, and pick up the stitches, 38 on each side of
the seam, 16 being for the gusset. When the gusset is done, there
ought to be 90 stitches on. Knit 79 rounds, or 5 inches measuring
from the heel, for the foot. Knit the toe, and cast off with 16
stitches.


=For the same (or for a Gentleman).=--Knitted with lambs'-wool
and wheeling-yarn. Cast on 96 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 1 pearl
and 2 plain alternately. Knit 36 rounds, or 8 inches in length,
increasing 6 stitches on each side of the seam, beginning at the
48th round, or 4th inch. Knit 4 rounds between each. There should
now be 108 stitches on. Begin the intakes.

  4 intakes with 3 rounds between.
  4 intakes with 4 rounds between.
  3 intakes with 5 rounds between.
  2 intakes with 6 rounds between.

This makes 26 intakes altogether--13 on each side, and reduces the
stocking to 82. Knit 48 rounds, or 4 inches, for the ankle. Divide
the stitches, placing 20 on each side of the seam, leaving 41 for
the front. Knit 33 rows for the heel, or 2¾ inches. Knit the top,
and pick up the stitches, 30 on each side, 10 being for the gusset.
When the gusset is done, there ought to be 82 stitches on. Knit 72
rounds plain, or 6 inches, for the foot, measuring from the heel.
Knit the toe, and cast off with 16 on each side.


='Rig-and-Fur' Stocking.=--There are two ways of shaping this kind
of stocking. One is to leave as many plain stitches on each side of
the seam-stitch as there are intakes. For example--In a stocking
for an infant (see page 11) there are 7 intakes on each side of the
seam-stitch; therefore 9 stitches would require to be left, so that
when the intakes are done, there will be 2 plain stitches remaining
on each side of the seam, and will join in with the pattern. It
is advisable to knit this stocking 2 plain and 1 pearl stitch
alternately.

The second way is to take in 3 or 4 stitches at a time, as
described in the knickerbocker hose. This is not so suitable for
very small stockings, as more rounds require to be knitted between
each intake, there being fewer of them.


=Striped Stocking.=--Six rows of black, and 1 or 2 of some colour,
make a very pretty stocking.

Knit the top-band with the coloured worsted, then tie on the black
at the side of the stitch chosen for the seam. Knit 5 rounds of
black, and pass up the coloured. Give it a single twist round the
black, taking care not to pull it too tight, but just sufficient to
bring the stripes opposite to each other.


=Gentlemen's Knickerbocker, or Kilt Hose.=--Knitted with 4-ply
fingering worsted--Needles, No. 16. Cast on 156 stitches. Knit
42 rounds for the top-band, 1 plain and 2 pearl stitches. Knit 1
round of holes, putting over the thread, and knitting 2 stitches
together. Knit 1 round plain. Knit 114 rounds, 1 pearl and 2 plain
stitches, or 9 inches in length.

The intakes of gentlemen's hose are done in the following manner:--

A pearl stitch should be fixed upon for the seam-stitch, by tying
a coloured thread round it; and it ought to be knitted pearl and
plain alternately.

There will be 2 plain stitches on each side of the seam-stitch.

Begin the intakes on the right hand side of the seam-stitch, by
slipping the 5th stitch from it. Knit together the 4th, 3d, and 2d,
then take the slipped stitch over.

This brings 2 plain stitches to the side of the seam-stitch again.

On the left hand side of the seam-stitch, slip the 2d stitch, knit
together the 3d, 4th, and 5th, then take the slip-stitch over.
Number of intakes:

  4 with  7 rounds between.
  1   "   8   "       "
  1   "  10   "       "
  1   "  11   "       "
  1   "  12   "       "

This makes 8 intakes on each side of the seam-stitch, and reduces
the stocking to 96 stitches. Knit 60 rounds for the ankle, or 4
inches. Then divide the stitches; placing 24 on each side of the
seam-stitch. Knit 43 rounds for the heel, or 2¾ inches, continuing
to knit it 1 pearl and 2 plain stitches. Then knit the top, and
pick up the stitches, 34 on each side--10 being for the gusset.
When this is finished, knit 79 rounds, or 5 inches, with the 1
pearl and 2 plain on the front of the foot, and plain on the back.
Knit 7 rounds, all plain. Knit the toe, and cast off, with 16
stitches on each side of the foot.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




SOCKS.


=For an Infant.=--Knitted with merino wool. Cast on 68 stitches.
Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches alternately. Knit 58
rounds plain, or 2¾ inches in length; increase 1 stitch on first
round. Knit the foot same as page 11.


=For a Child a Year Old.=--Knitted with merino wool. Cast on 72
stitches. Knit 24 rounds, pearl and plain alternately. Knit 67
rounds plain, or 3 inches in length; increase 1 stitch on first
round. Knit the foot same as page 12.


=For a Child from 2 to 3 Years.=--Knitted with merino wool. Cast on
84 stitches. Knit 26 rounds, pearl and plain alternately. Knit 83
rounds, or 4 inches in length; increase 2 stitches on first round,
and knit the foot same as page 14.


=For a Child from 4 to 5 Years.=--Knitted with merino wool. Cast on
92 stitches. Knit 28 rounds, pearl and plain alternately. Knit 93
rounds plain, or 4½ inches in length; increase 1 stitch on first
round; and knit the foot same as page 15.


=For a Boy from 4 to 6 Years.=--Knitted with fingering
worsted.--Cast on 64 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 pearl and 2 plain
stitches alternately. Knit 47 rounds, or 3 inches in length;
increase 2 stitches on first round; and knit the foot same as page
16.


=For a Boy from 6 to 8 Years.=--Knitted with fingering
worsted.--Cast on 72 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 pearl and 2 plain
stitches alternately. Knit 63 rounds, or 4 inches; increasing 1
stitch on first round. Then knit the foot same as page 17.


=For the Same.=--Knitted with lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.--Cast
on 52 stitches. Knit 20 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl alternately.
Knit 48 rounds, 2 or 4 inches in length, for the leg. Then knit the
foot, same as page 18.


=For a Boy from 8 to 10 Years.=--Knitted with fingering
worsted.--Cast on 78 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 pearl and 2 plain
alternately. Knit 79 rounds, or 5 inches in length; increasing 2
stitches on the first round. Then knit the foot same as page 21.


=For the Same.=--Knitted with lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.--Cast
on 57 stitches. Knit 20 rounds, 1 pearl and 2 plain alternately.
Knit 60 rounds plain, or 5 inches in length, for the leg,
increasing 1 stitch on the second round. Knit the foot same as page
19.


=For a Boy from 10 to 12 Years.=--Knitted with fingering
worsted.--Cast on 84 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 pearl and 2 plain
alternately. Knit 95 rounds, or 6 inches in length; increase 2
stitches on first round. Divide the stitches; placing 21 on each
side of the seam-stitch, leaving 42 for the front of the foot. Knit
35 rows, plain and pearl alternately, for the heel, or 2¼ inches in
length. Knit the top, and pick up the stitches, till there are 36
on each side of the seam-stitch, 12 being for the gusset. When the
gusset is finished, knit 71 rounds, or 4½ inches in length. Knit
the toe, and cast off, with 16 stitches on each side, measuring
from heel.


=For the Same.=--Knitted with lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.--Cast
on 69 stitches. Knit 22 rounds, 1 pearl and 2 plain alternately.
Knit 72 rounds plain, or 6 inches, for the foot. Increase 1 stitch
on second round. Knit the foot same as page 19.


=Socks for Gentlemen.=--Knitted with fingering worsted. Cast on 92
stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 2 pearl stitches alternately.
Knit 111 rounds, or 7 inches in length. Increase 2 stitches on
first round. Divide the stitches, placing 23 on each side of the
seam, leaving 47 for front of the foot. Knit 43 rows, or 2¾ inches,
for the heel. Knit the top, and pick up the stitches for the foot
till there are 33 on each side of the seam, 10 being for the
gusset. When the gusset is finished, knit 62 rounds, or 5 inches,
for the foot. Knit the toe; and cast off with 16 stitches on each
side.


=For the Same.=--Knitted with lambs'-wool and wheeling-yarn.--Cast
on 81 stitches. Knit 24 rounds, 2 plain and 1 pearl alternately.
Knit 84 rounds plain, or 7 inches, increasing 1 stitch on each
round. Knit the foot same as page 22.




OPEN-WORK PATTERNS

SUITABLE FOR STOCKINGS.


EXPLANATION OF TERMS.

  O means put over the thread.
  T is knit two together.
  A is slip a stitch, knit 2 together, and take the slipped stitch over.
  Ts is slip a stitch, knit 1 plain, and take the slipped stitch over.
  P is plain 1.
  B stands for pearl.


LEAF PATTERN.

Calculate 9 stitches for each pattern, and 3 for pearl stripe.

   1st round--P, O, P, O, P, T, B3.
   2d    "    P8, T, B3.
   3d    "    P2, O, P, O, P4, T, B3.
   4th   "    P8, T, B3.
   5th   "    P3, O, P, O, P3, T, B3.
   6th   "    P8, T, B3.
   7th   "    P4, O, P, O, P2, T, B3.
   8th   "    P8, T, B3.
   9th   "    P5, O, P, O, P, T, B3.
  10th   "    P8, T, B3.
  11th   "    P6, O, P, T, B3.
  12th   "    P8, T, B3.


DOUBLE ROSE-LEAF PATTERN, SUITABLE FOR LARGE STOCKINGS.

Calculate for each pattern, 15 stitches, and 2 for pearl stripe.
The stripe may be made broader according to size.

  1st row--O, P, Ts, B, T, P, B, P, Ts, B, T, P, O, B2.
  2d   "   P3, B, P2, B, P2, B, P3, B2.
  3d   "   O, P, O, Ts, B, T, B, Ts, B, T, O, P, O, B2
  4th  "   P4, B, P, B, P, B, P4, B2.
  5th  "   O, P3, O, A, B, A, O, P3, B2.
  6th  "   P6, B, P6, B2.
  7th  "   O, P5, O, A, O, P5, O, B2.
  8th  "   plain all but the pearl stripes.


SPIDER NET, WITH PEARL STRIPES.

Calculate 12 stitches for each pattern, and 4 for pearl stripes.

  1st row--O, P, O, T, P, T, _repeat_ pearl 4.
  2d   "   plain, all but the pearl stripes.
  3d   "   O, P3, O, A, _repeat_ pearl 4.
  4th  "   plain, all but the pearl stripes.
  5th  "   T, O, P, O, T, P, T, _repeat_ pearl 4.
  6th  "   same as 2d.
  7th  "   A, O, P3, O, _repeat_ pearl 4.
  8th  "   same as 2d.


PATTERN DIAMOND OF FOUR HOLES.

Calculate 6 stitches for each pattern.

  1st row--P3, T, O, P2.
  2d   "   Plain.
  3d   "   P2, T, O, T, O.
  4th  "   Plain.
  5th  "   P3, T, O, P.
  6th  "   Plain.
  7th  "   T, O, P4.
  8th  "   Plain.


SIMPLE PATTERN.

Calculate 6 stitches for each pattern.

  1st row--Pearl 3, O, T, P.
  2d   "   Pearl 3, P3.
  3d   "   Pearl 3, P, O, T.
  4th  "   Pearl 3, P3.


PATTERN WITH TWO OPEN LEAVES.

Calculate 23 stitches for each pattern.

  1st row--P2, T, O, T, O, T, P1, O, P1, O, P5, T, O, T, O, T, P2.
  Every alternate row is plain.
  3d, 5th, 7th, and 9th rows same as 1st.
  11th row--P2, T, O, T, O, T, P5, O, P1, O, P1, T, O, T, O, T, P2.
  13th, 15th, 17th, and 19th rows same as 11th row.


SCOLLOP OF THREE HOLES.

Calculate 10 stitches for each pattern, and 3 for pearl stripe.

   1st round--P, O, Ts, O, Ts, O, Ts, P3, B3.
   2d    "    plain, all but pearl stripes.
   3d    "    P2, O, Ts, O, Ts, O, Ts, P2, B3.
   4th   "    Same as 2d.
   5th   "    P3, O, Ts, O, Ts, O, Ts, P, B3.
   6th   "    Same as 2d.
   7th   "    P4, O, Ts, O, Ts, O, Ts, B3.
   8th   "    Same as 2d.
   9th   "    P2, T, O, T, O, T, O, P2, B3.
  10th   "    Same as 2d.
  11th   "    P, T, O, T, O, T, O, P3.
  12th   "    Same as 2d.
  13th   "    T, O, T, O, T, O, P4, B3.
  14th   "    Same as 2d.

[Illustration: (Decorative Separator)]




       *       *       *       *       *




LIST OF NEW WORKS.


Now ready, extra foolscap 8vo, cloth, price 2s. 6d.,

LESSONS FROM THE LIFE

OF THE LATE

JAMES NISBET, PUBLISHER, LONDON.

A STUDY FOR YOUNG MEN.

BY HIS SON-IN-LAW, THE REV. J. A. WALLACE.

_A limited number of copies, with Photographic Copy of a Miniature
Portrait by Booth, price 3s. 6d._


Now ready, crown 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges, with Six
Illustrations, price 5s.,

SKETCHES OF SCRIPTURE CHARACTERS.

BY THE REV. ANDREW THOMSON, D.D.

CONTENTS.

  1. The Hebrew Maid. 2. Naaman the Syrian. 3. Gehazi. 4.
  Nehemiah--Part I. The Cup-Bearer; Part II. The Governor. 5.
  Absalom. 6. Simeon. 7. John the Baptist. 8. The Daughter of
  Herodias. 9. The Woman with the Alabaster-Box. 10. Pontius
  Pilate. 11. Simon the Cyrenian. 12. Dorcas. 13. Mary the Mother
  of John Mark.

  'Of the excellence of these sketches, it may be enough to say,
  that as they appeared successively in the pages of the _Christian
  Treasury_, they formed for a twelvemonth one of its most
  attractive features, and that they were not more popular than
  they deserved to be.... Externally, the volume is a gem, one of
  the most tasteful of the many tasteful publications which have
  recently issued from the same press.'--_Brechin Advertiser._


Now ready, extra foolscap 8vo, Illustrated, price 2s. 6d.; gilt
edges, 3s.,

THE DOMESTIC CIRCLE;

OR,

The Relations, Responsibilities, and Duties of Home Life.

BY THE REV. JOHN THOMSON, PAISLEY.

CONTENTS.

  1. The Head of the Family. 2. The Wife. 3. The Husband. 4. The
  Children. 5. The Young Men. 6. The Young Women. 7. The Servants.
  8. The Master and Mistress. 9. The Widow and Fatherless. 10. The
  Family Sabbath. 11. The Family Altar. 12. The Family Bond, 'Love.'

  'The author has produced a book whose value may be appreciated by
  any reader.'--_British and Foreign Evangelical Review_, January
  1867.


  EDINBURGH:
  JOHNSTONE, HUNTER, & CO.

  LONDON:
  HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO.

AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.




[Registered for Transmission Abroad.]


THE CHRISTIAN TREASURY

SIXPENCE MONTHLY.

A Family Miscellany.

EDITED BY THE

REV. HORATIUS BONAR, D.D.,

AUTHOR OF 'HYMNS OF FAITH AND HOPE,' ETC. ETC.

Also in Weekly Numbers, price 1d.; in Yearly Volumes, price 6s. 6d.

This old established magazine (started in 1845) contains Original
and Selected Papers by Ministers and Members of various Evangelical
Denominations, and will be found eminently adapted for family and
private reading.

A Recent Opinion of the Press.

  'The _Christian Treasury_ is the father of a large and increasing
  family. It is the oldest of our monthly religious magazines in a
  cheap form. It aims at a high literary standard, and keeps well
  up to it.... We cordially recommend this old friend and favourite
  to the goodwill of our readers, old and young.'--_From the London
  Record, Jan. 1867._


THE CHILDREN'S HOUR.

THREEPENCE MONTHLY.

A Magazine for Our Young Folk.

BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED.

EDITED BY M. H.,

AUTHOR OF 'THE STORY OF A RED VELVET BIBLE,' AND OTHER POPULAR
TALES.

      Between the dark and the daylight,
        When the night is beginning to lower,
      Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
        That is known as "The Children's Hour."
                          --LONGFELLOW.

Published also in Half-yearly Volumes, elegantly bound, price 3s.

  'We have much pleasure in recommending the _Children's
  Hour_.'--_London Record._

  'We have high authority--that of a critic of eleven years of age,
  who has read every number through--for pronouncing it "a splendid
  book." Now, Aunt Jane, when you want to make somebody happy, you
  know what to do.'--_Evangelical Witness._

  'Will be perused with delight by both boys and girls.'--_North
  British Daily Mail._

  'The article here supplied is well worth the money, and
  we strongly advise paterfamilias, when next he orders his
  shilling _Cornhill_ or _Macmillan_, to order along with them
  the _Children's Hour_, for the regalement of the little
  folks.'--_Dundee Courier and Argus._


  EDINBURGH:
  JOHNSTONE, HUNTER, & CO.

  LONDON:
  GROOMBRIDGE AND SONS.

  AND BY ORDER OF ANY BOOKSELLER.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg 31: '3d, 5, 7th' replaced by '3d, 5th, 7th'.

  The advert page at the front of the original book had the first
  complete line of each of the sixteen entries in bold font. This has
  been slightly modified so that only the title of each entry is bolded.

  The back cover had book and magazine adverts printed on both sides. A
  thin strip of tape covered or partially covered some words on the
  right hand side of the outside cover page, 3 or 4 letters per line.
  The obscured letters have been reconstructed with a high degree
  of confidence in the accuracy of the etext.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOCKING-KNITTER'S MANUAL: A HANDY BOOK FOR THE WORK-TABLE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


