The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Past and the Present Condition, and the Destiny, of the Colored Race
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Past and the Present Condition, and the Destiny, of the Colored Race

Author: Henry Highland Garnet

Other: New York Female Benevolent Society

Release date: February 23, 2019 [eBook #58943]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by hekula03, David E. Brown, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from images made available by the
        HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PAST AND THE PRESENT CONDITION, AND THE DESTINY, OF THE COLORED RACE ***




Produced by hekula03, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)









  MR. GARNET’S
  DISCOURSE.


  THE
  PAST AND THE PRESENT
  CONDITION, AND THE DESTINY,
  OF
  THE COLORED RACE:
  A DISCOURSE

  DELIVERED AT THE FIFTEENTH ANNIVERSARY
  OF THE
  FEMALE BENEVOLENT SOCIETY
  OF TROY, N. Y., FEB. 14, 1848,

  BY
  HENRY HIGHLAND GARNET.


  TROY, N. Y.:
  STEAM PRESS OF J. C. KNEELAND AND CO.
  1848.




                                                    TROY, FEB. 22, 1848.

REV. HENRY H. GARNET--

DEAR SIR:--The members of F. B. S., having listened to your discourse
with great pleasure, and being desirous to present it to the Public,
have requested us to solicit a copy for publication, and we trust, sir,
that nothing will prevent you from granting our request,

            Most respectfully, &c.,

                                          HANNAH B. RICH, _President_;
                                          CHARLOTTE PUTMAN, _Rec. Sec._;
                                          LOUISA A. GIDEONS, _Cor. Sec._

                   *       *       *       *       *

                                                    TROY, FEB. 26, 1848.

LADIES:--I have received your polite note of the 22d inst., and, while
I consider myself fortunate in serving you acceptably, I deem it my
duty to comply with your request.

            I am, Ladies, and ever hope to be, your friend and servant,

                                                           H. H. GARNET.

  Mrs. H. B. RICH,
  Miss CHARLOTTE PUTMAN,
  Miss L. A. GIDEONS.




ADDRESS.


LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

My theme is the Past and the Present condition, and the Destiny of the
Colored race. The path of thought which you are invited to travel, has
not as I am aware, been pursued heretofore to any considerable extent.
The Present, is the midway between the Past and the Future. Let us
ascend that sublime eminence, that we may view the vast empire of ruin
that is scarcely discernable through the mists of former ages; and if,
while we are dwelling upon the desolations that meet our eyes, we shall
mourn over them, I entreat you to look upward and behold the bright,
scenery of the future. There we have a clear sky, and from thence
are refreshing breezes. The airy plains are radiant with prophetic
brightness, and truth, love, and liberty are descending the heavens,
bearing the charter of man’s destiny to a waiting world.

All the various forms of truth that are presented to the minds of
men, are in perfect harmony with the government of God. Many things
that appear to be discordant are not really so; for when they are
understood, and the mind becomes illuminated and informed, the imagined
deformities disappear as spectres depart from the vision of one who
had been a maniac, when his reason returns. “God is the rock, his work
is perfect--a God of truth, and without iniquity. Justice and judgment
are the habitations of his throne, and mercy and truth go before his
face. His righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and his law is
the truth.”

The truth will profit us nothing if we suffer it not to clothe us in
our right minds--it returns without accomplishing its high mission to
us, if we refuse to let her lead us to the delectable mountain, from
whence we can behold the pure stream of the law of Jehovah, flowing
from his throne, hailed by angel voices and the music of the spheres.

In order to pursue my subject I must, for the sake of distinction, use
some of the improper terms of our times. I shall, therefore, speak of
_races_, when in fact there is but one race, as there was but one Adam.

By an almost common consent, the modern world seems determined to
pilfer Africa of her glory. It were not enough that her children
have been scattered over the globe, clothed in the garments of
shame--humiliated and oppressed--but her merciless foes weary
themselves in plundering the tombs of our renowned sires, and in
obliterating their worthy deeds, which were inscribed by fame upon the
pages of ancient history.

The three grand divisions of the earth that were known to the
ancients, were colonized by the three sons of Noah. Shem was the
father of the Asiatics--the Africans descended from Ham, and Japheth
was the progenitor of the Europeans. These men being the children
of one father, they were originally of the same complexion--for we
cannot through the medium of any law of nature or reason, come to the
conclusion, that one was black, another was copper-colored, and the
other was white. Adam was a red man, and by what law of nature his
descendants became dissimilar to him, is a problem which is yet to
be clearly solved. The fact that the universal Father has varied the
complexions of his children, does not detract from his mercy, or give
us reason to question his wisdom.

Moses is the patriarch of sacred history. The same eminent station is
occupied by Herodotus in profane history. To the chronicles of these
two great men we are indebted for all the information we have in
relation to the early condition of man. If they are incorrect, to what
higher authority shall we appeal--and if they are true, then we may
acquaint ourselves with the history of our race from that period,

    “When yonder spheres sublime,
  Peal’d their first notes to sound the march of time.”

Ham was the first African. Egypt was settled by an immediate descendant
of Ham, who, in sacred history, is called Mesraim, and in uninspired
history he is known by the name of Menes. Yet in the face of this
historical evidence, there are those who affirm that the ancient
Egyptians were not of the pure African stock. The gigantic stature of
the Phynx has the peculiar features of the children of Ham--one of the
most celebrated queens of Egypt was Nitocris, an Ethiopian woman; yet
these intellectual resurrectionists dig through a mountain of such
evidence, and declare that these people were not negroes.

We learn from Herodotus, that the ancient Egyptians were black, and
had woolly hair. These people astonished the world with their arts
and sciences, in which they reveled with unbounded prodigality. They
became the masters of the East, and the lords of the Hebrews. No arm
less powerful than Jehovah’s, could pluck the children of Abraham from
their hands. The plagues were marshalled against them, and the pillars
of cloud and of fire, and at last the resistless sea. “Then the horse
and the rider, sank like lead in the mighty waters.” But the kingdom of
Ptolemys was still great. The most exalted mortal eulogium that could
be spoken of Moses, was that he was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians. It was from them that he gathered the materials with which
he reared that grand superstructure, partaking of law, poetry, and
history, which has filled the world with wonder and praise. Mournful
reverses of fortune have passed over that illustrious people. The star
that arose in such matchless splendor above the eastern horizon has
had its setting. But Egypt, Africa’s dark browed queen, still lives.
Her pyramid tombs--her sculptured collumns dug from the sands to adorn
modern architecture--the remnants of her once impregnable walls--the
remains of her hundred gated city, rising over the wide-spread ruins,
as if to guard the fame of the race that gave them existence, all
proclaim what she once was.

Whatever may be the extent of prejudice against color, as it is falsely
called, and is so generally practiced in this country, Solomon, the
most renowned of kings, possessed none of it. Among the seven hundred
wives, and the three hundred concubines, who filled his houses, the
most favored queen was a beautiful sable daughter of one of the
Pharoahs of Egypt. In order to take her to his bosom, he trampled upon
the laws of his nation, and incurred the divine displeasure--for a Jew
might not espouse any heathen or idolater who was not circumcised in
heart. When he had secured her, he bowed his great intellect before
her, that he might do her that homage which he paid to no other woman.
Solomon was a poet, and pure love awakened the sweetest melody in his
soul. To her honor and praise he composed that beautiful poem called
the CANTICLES, or SOLOMON’S SONG. For her he wove that gorgeous wreath
which is unsurpassed in its kind, and with his own royal hand placed
it upon her dark brow. Several persons are represented in the poem,
and it is composed of an interesting coloquy. The reader is introduced
to “the watchmen that went about the streets,” and to “the daughters
of Jerusalem,” and to the bride and the groom, which are the king
and the beauteous Egyptian. It is not at all surprising that she who
received such distinguished marks of kingly favors, should encounter
the jealousy of the daughters of Jerusalem. They saw that the Egyptian
woman had monopolised the heart of the son of David, and the royal poet
represents his queen to say to her fairer but supplanted rivals:--

    “I am black but comely,
    O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
    As the tents of Kedar,
    As the curtains of Solomon.
  Look not upon me, because I am black,
  Because the sun has looked upon me.”

Thus she speaks of the superiority which nature had given her over the
women of Jerusalem. She was handsome, and like all handsome women, she
knew it.

The bride again speaks, and says to the bride-groom:--

  “I have compared thee, O my love,
  To a company of horses in Pharaoh’s chariot.”

How inappropriate were this allusion if it had been placed in the
mouth of any one else but an Egyptian. To give the passage any other
interpretation is virtually accusing Solomon of grosser ignorance than
my reverence will allow me to attribute to him.

Professor STOWE and President MAHAN, and others, agree in giving the
following translation to another verse in the first chapter of the song,

  “Ere I was aware
  My soul was as the war-chariot
  Of my noble people.”

The whole poem, without doubt, is nothing more than a brilliant
out-burst of Solomon’s love for his bride.

Homer, the prince of epic poets, speaks of the Ethiopians, and presents
them at the feast of the gods. These men of sun-burnt faces, as their
name implies, he calls the excellent Ethiopians.

A distinguished scholar,[A] speaking of this passage in the Grecian’s
renowned poem, in the presence of an American pedant, the young upstart
seriously inquired if the Ethiopians were black? “Most assuredly,”
answered the scholar. “Well,” said the young republican, “had I been at
that feast, and negroes had been placed at the table, I would have left
it.” “Had you been living at that time, returned the other, you would
have been saved the trouble of leaving the table, for the gods would
not have invited you.”

Such a man in such a banquet would have been as much out of place as an
ass would be in a concert of sacred music.

The interior of Ethiopia has not been explored by modern adventurers.
The antiquarian has made his way into almost every dominion where
relics of former greatness have promised to reward him for his toil.
But this country, as though she had concealed some precious treasure,
meets the traveller on the outskirts of her dominions, with pestilence
and death. Yet, in the Highlands which have been traversed, many
unequivocal traces of former civilization have been discovered. Very
lately, British enterprize has made some important researches in that
region of Country, all of which go to prove that Homer did not misplace
his regards for them, when he associated them with the Gods.

The wife of Moses was an Ethiopian woman, and when Miriam, his sister,
murmured against her, the Almighty smote Miriam, and she became
white. Whether the murmuring arose on account of the complexion of the
great Lawgiver’s wife, or from some other cause, I will not attempt to
determine. Whatever was the cause, we all see how Jehovah regarded it,
how fierce was his indignation, and how terrible his punishment. He
came down and stood in a cloudy pillar, and cursed the woman in whose
bosom the unholy prejudice was harbored.[B]

Ethiopia is one of the few nations whose destiny is spoken of in
prophecy. This is done in language so plain that we are not driven to
dubious inferences.

It is said that “Princes shall come out of Egypt, and Ethiopia shall
soon stretch out her hands unto God.” It is thought by some that this
divine declaration was fulfilled when Philip baptised the converted
eunuch of the household of Candes, the Queen of the Ethiopians. In this
transaction, a part of the prophecy may have been fulfilled, and only a
part.

A vision seen by another prophet has become a matter of history. Hosea,
foresaw that God would call his son out of Egypt, and when the infant
Redeemer could find no shelter in the land of the Hebrews, he found
an asylum in Egypt, where he remained until Herod was dead. He then
returned to his native country, and in that event he fulfilled the
declaration of the holy seer.

Numerous other instances might be mentioned that would indicate
the ancient fame of our ancestors. A fame, which arose from every
virtue, and talent, that render mortals pre-eminently great. From the
conquests of love and beauty, from the prowess of their arms, and their
architecture, poetry, mathematics, generosity, and piety. I will barely
allude to the beautiful Cleopatra, who swayed and captivated the heart
of Anthony. To Hannibal, the sworn enemy and the scourge of Rome--the
mighty General who crossed the Alps to meet his foes--the Alps which
had never before been crossed by an army, nor never since, if we except
Napoleon, the ambitious corsican. To Terence, Euclid, Cyprian, Origen,
and Augustine.

At this time, when these representatives of our race were filling the
world with amazement, the ancestors of the now proud and boasting
Anglo Saxons were among the most degraded of the human family. They
abode in caves under ground, either naked or covered with the skins of
wild beasts. Night was made hideous by their wild shouts, and day was
darkened by the smoke which arose from bloody alters, upon which they
offered human sacrifice.

For a long series of years, immediately following her brilliant era,
the history of Africa appears not to be animated by many stiring
events. Somewhere about the year of 1511, Charles V, of Spain,
procured slaves from the coast of Guinea, and sent them to Hispaniola.
Bartholemew Las Cassas, a Roman Catholic priest, and afterwards bishop
Chioppa, came to this new world, which had just been called out of
obscurity by the adventurous spirit of Christopher Columbus. He left
Spain under the auspices of Charles. The Castillian Monarch had
enslaved the Indians who inhabited his dominions, but soon found that
they were unprofitable in such a relation. Encouraged by his Clerical
confident, his evil genius, he introduced into South America a number
of slaves from Africa, because one black man could do as much labor as
four Indians. Las Cassas, in mercy to the aborigines, recommended to
Cardinal Zimernes, to enslave the children of Africa. The Cardinal, to
his honor be it said, objected to the project, but nevertheless the
trade went on. The number was at first limited at four thousand, but
as might be expected this numerical boundry was soon over-steped. A
trade that was found to be so lucrative, was ultimately taken up by
almost every Christian nation, until that unhappy country was annually
plundered of 300,000 of her children. Future generations will gaze upon
the names of the guilty priest and King, in that contemptuous position
where they have placed themselves. Shame will deepen the hatred of
their memory, as men become enlightened and just, and clouds of infamy
will thicken around them as the world moves on toward God.

In 1620, the very same year in which the Pilgrims landed on the cold
and rocky shores of New England, a Dutch ship freighted with souls
touched the banks of James river, where the wretched people were
employed as slaves in the cultivation of that hateful weed, tobacco.
Wonderful coincidence! The angel of liberty hovered over New England,
and the Demon of slavery unfurled his black flag over the fields of the
“sunny south.”

But latterly the slave-trade has been pronounced to be piracy by
most all of the civilized world. Great Britain has discarded the
chattel principle throughout her dominions. In 1824 Mexico proclaimed
freedom to her slaves. The Pope of Rome, and the sovereigns of Turkey,
and Denmark, and other nations bow at the shrine of Liberty. But
France has laid the richest offering upon the alter of freedom, that
has been presented to God in these latter days. In achieving her
almost bloodless revolution, she maintained an admirable degree of
consistency. The same blast of the trumpet of Liberty that rang through
the halls of the Tulleries, and shattered the throne of the Bourbons,
also reached the shores of her remotest colonies, and proclaimed the
redemption of every slave that moved on French soil. Thus does France
remember the paternal advice of La Fayette, and atone for the murder
of Tousaint. Thanks be to God, the lilly is cleansed of the blood
that stained it. The nations of the earth will gaze with delight upon
its democratic purity, wherever it shall be seen. Whether in the
grape-grown valleys where it first bloomed, or in the Isles of Bourbon,
Gaudaloupe, Martinique, or in Guinna.[C] The colored people of St.
Bartholomews, who were emancipated by a decree of the King of Sweden
last year, have lately sent an address to their Liberator. Hayti, by
the heroism of her Oge, Tousaint, La-Overture, Dessalines, Christophe,
Petion, and Boyer, have driven the demon of slavery from that island,
and have burried his carcase in the sea.

Briefly, and imperfectly have I noticed the former condition of the
colored race. Let us turn for a moment to survey our present state.
The woeful volume of our history as it now lies open to the world,
is written with tears and bound in blood. As I trace it my eyes ache
and my heart is filled with grief. No other people have suffered so
much, and none have been more innocent. If I might apostsophize, that
bleeding country I would say, O Africa! thou has bled, freely bled,
at every pore! Thy sorrow has been mocked, and thy grief has not been
heeded. Thy children are scattered over the whole earth, and the great
nations have been enriched by them. The wild beasts of thy forests are
treated with more mercy than they. The Lybian lion and the fierce tiger
are caged to gratify the curiosity of men, and the keeper’s hands are
not laid heavily upon them. But thy children are tortured, taunted,
and hurried out of life by unprecedented cruelty. Brave men formed
in the divinest mould, are bartered, sold and mortgaged. Stripped of
every sacred right, they are scourged if they affirm that they belong
to God. Women sustaining the dear relation of mothers, are yoked with
the horned cattle to till the soil, and their heart strings are
torn to pieces by cruel seperations from their children. Our sisters
ever manifesting the purest kindness, whether in the wilderness of
their father-land, or amid the sorrows of the middle passage, or in
crowded cities, are unprotected from the lusts of tyrants. They have a
regard for virtue, and they possess a sense of honor, but there is no
respect paid to these jewels of noble character. Driven into unwilling
concubinage, their offspring are sold by their Anglo Saxon fathers. To
them the marriage institution is but a name, for their despoilers break
down the hymenial alter and scatter its sacred ashes on the winds.

Our young men are brutalized in intellect, and their manly energies are
chilled by the frosts of slavery. Sometimes they are called to witness
the agonies of the mothers who bore them writhing under the lash, and
as if to fill up to overflowing the already full cup of demonism, they
are sometimes compelled to apply the lash with their own hands. Hell
itself cannot overmatch a deed like this,--and dark damnation shudders
as it sinks into its bosom, and seeks to hide itself from the indignant
eye of God.

  “They till oppression’s soil where men,
    For liberty have bled,
  And the eagle wing of freedom waves,
    In mockery over head.
  The earth is filled with the triumph shouts
    Of men who have burst their chains,
  But theirs the heaviest of them all
    Still lay on their burning veins.

  In the tyrants halls there are luxury,
    And wealth, and mental light,
  But the very book of the Christian law,
    Is hidden from their sight.
  In the tyrants halls there are wine, and mirth,
    And songs for the newly free,
  But their own low cabins are desolate,
    Of all but misery.”

Spain, who gave the first impulse and royal sanction to the slave
trade, still clings to her idolatry. It rests as a plague spot upon
the faces of her people. A case lately ordered before the United
States Supreme Court, by one of her subjects, and favored by President
Van Buren, secured one of the most important decisions ever given in
this Nation. I allude to the case of the Armistad, whose whole cargo
of souls were emancipated on the high seas, by the heroism of the
chieftain Joseph Cinque. He arose in the strength of his manhood, and
slew the captain, and imprisoned the crew, as they were pursuing their
course from Havanna to Matanzas. Being unacquainted with navigation,
he commanded the seamen to steer towards the sun-rise, knowing that
his native country was in the East. But the sky becoming cloudy, the
traders directed the vessel towards the American coast, expecting
to find favor and assistance from their fellow bandits and brother
pirates in this country. But in this they were mistaken, for justice
triumphed. When the woe-freighted bark neared our coast, and Cinque saw
the star-spangled banner floating in the breeze, it was then that the
hero addressed his despairing comrades, while a triumphant smile played
upon his face, and said, “_Brothers, we would have conquered, but the
sun was against us_.” A sentence more heroic was never uttered by an
untutored savage.

It may be asked, why did he despair when he saw the flag of our
country? Here is the answer, and be not surprised at it. Because he had
seen it waving protectively from the masts of slavers, when freedom
owned him as her child, and when he breathed her spirit on his native
hills.

The slave trade is carried on briskly in the beautiful island of Cuba.
A few years ago, I witnessed the landing of a cargo of slaves, fresh
from the coast of Africa, in the port of Havanna, in the presence
of the Governor, and under the shadow of the Moro Castle, one of the
strongest fortifications of the world.

Recently, a great sacrifice has been made in that Island to the Spirit
of despotism, in the death of the Patriot and Poet, Placido. Freedom
mourns over his early tomb. The waves of the Atlantic, of whose
vastness and sublimity he had sung, chaunted his dirge as the tyrants
hid him in the grave! Placido was a mulatto, a true Poet, and of course
a Patriot. His noble soul was moved with pity as he saw his fellow men
in chains. Born to feel, and to act, he made a bold attempt to effect a
revolution, and failing in it, he fell a martyr to his principles.

On the day previous to his death, he wrote the following lines, of
which Coolridge or Montgomery would not have been ashamed. They present
a blaze of poetic fire, intense and sublime:--

    “O Liberty! I wait for thee,
    To break this chain, and dungeon bar;
    I hear thy voice calling me,
    Deep in the frozen North, afar,
  With voice like God’s, and vision like a star.

    Long cradled in the mountain wind,
    Thy mates, the eagle and the storm
    Arise; and from thy brow unbind
    The wreath that gives its starry form,
  And smite the strength, that would thy strength deform.

    Yet Liberty! thy dawning light,
    Obscured by dungeon bars, shall cast
    A splendor on the breaking night,
    And tyrants flying thick and fast,
  Shall tremble at thy gaze, and stand aghast.”

The next day they led Placido forth to execution, and from the mouths
of bristling musketry a shower of lead was poured upon his quivering
heart. That heart stood still,--and a truer, braver one, never beat in
the breast of a mortal man!

The Brazillian Government holds three millions of the colored race in
slavery. The United States have about the same number. The Spanish
Colonies have one million.

But it is proper to turn the other side of the picture, and I rejoice
that there is another side. Nine hundred thousand of these people are
enjoying their freedom in the British West India Isles. There are six
hundred thousand free people in the United States, while in Hayti
we have an independent population of nearly a million. Possessing a
land of unsurpassed fertility, they have but to turn their attention
manfully to Agricultural pursuits and it will shine forth the brightest
Isle that slumbers in the arms of old ocean.

In regard to the enslavement of our race, this Country presents as
mournful a picture as any other beneath the sun; but still it is
not hopelessly enshrouded in darkness. The good institutions of the
land are well adapted to the developement of the mind. So far as the
oppressed shall make their own way towards them, and shall escape the
influence of those that are evil, so far shall they succeed in throwing
off their bitter thraldom, and in wrenching the scourge from the hands
of tyranny.

Slavery has done much to ruin us, and we ourselves have done some
things which effect the same. Perhaps the evils of which I am about to
speak arise from slavery, and are the things without which the system
cannot exist. But nevertheless we must contribute largely towards their
overthrow. If it is in our power to destroy these evils, and we do not,
then much of our own blood will be found on us.

We are divided by party feuds, and are torn in pieces by dissensions.
Some men have prostituted good talents, for the base purpose of
kindling the fires of discord. Some who officiated in the temples
said to be dedicated to God, are idolaters to sectarianism. And some
too would draw a line of blood distinction, and would form factions
upon the shallow basis of complexion. But I am glad to know that
the number of this class is small, and small as it is, I pray that
we may soon be able to write a cypher in its place. Let there be no
strife between us, for we are brethren, and we must rise or fall
together. How unprofitable it is for us to spend our golden moments
in long and solemn debate upon the questions whether we shall be
called “_Africans_,” “_Colored Americans_,” or “_Africo Americans_,”
or “_Blacks_.” The question should be, my friends, _shall we arise
and act like men, and cast off this terrible yoke?_ Many are too apt
to follow after shams, and to neglect that which is solid. Thousands
are often expended for an hour’s display of utter emptiness, which
ought to be laid aside to increase our wealth, and for the acquirement
of knowledge, and for the promotion of education. Societies, called
benevolent, frequently squander more money for the purchase of banners
and badges, and in feasting, than they use in acts of charity. What are
regalia and other trappings worth, if they signify nothing but sham and
parade? In 1846, $5000 were paid by the oppressed Colored people at the
Temperance Celebration held in Poughkeepsie, N. Y., and yet we do not
adequately support a single Newspaper in the United States.

The first of August meeting, held in Canandaigua, in 1847, cost the
same class not less than $10,000; and yet we do not find _a hundred_ of
our young men and women in our high-schools and colleges. The gorgeous
pageant of the Odd Fellows in October 1847, drew from the pockets of
the people, at a very moderate calculation, the sum of $8000, while
many of their offspring who ought to be drinking at the fountain
of learning, are mourning by the turbid and cold waters of servile
employments. The FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS can boast nothing over other
fraternities in regard to unnecessary expenditures. The Masons have
led off in this course of wastefulness, and a majority of the other
institutions are but children of the great ORIGINAL, and they resemble
their parent more or less. Let no one say that I seek the destruction
of these Institutions. I desire rather to remove the unfruitful
branches of the trees, that it may be ascertained whether their trunks
are capable of bearing good fruit. If they can produce good, if there
is life in the stock, let them remain that they may be beautified by
the dresser’s hands. But if the roots are corrupt, and their branches
cast a deadly shade, let them be cut down, for why should they cumber
the ground?

May God grant, that we may betake ourselves to greater wisdom and
frugality. I know that the oppressed above all other people need
holidays, and pastimes, but in no case should we bid adieu to our
common sense. Let all be careful, lest in this age of ribbon, velvet
and gold lace revival, that we do not fall into fanaticism. Fanatics
sometimes have strange visions, and it would be strange, “passing
strange,” should any considerable portion of a whole race imagine
themselves in a world of ribbons, painted sticks, and vanity without
measure.

We ought to have our monster meetings, but we should assemble with
the same spirit, that animated the Irish people, when they were led
by that giant of freedom Daniel O’Connell, which should be, to use
his own words, to “agitate, and agitate, and agitate until the chains
of the three millions are broken.” A half penny’s worth of green
ribbon and a sprig of shamrock signified to the Irishman more than
all the gaudy trappings of a Grand Master, or a Prince of Jerusalem.
These little things represented a grand principle to the minds of the
unconquerable sons of Erin. _The principles of progress in the ways of
truth, and resistence to tyranny should be the bases of all our public
demonstrations, and numerical representations._

We should have likewise, days of bitter bread, and tabernacle in the
wilderness, in which to remember our grief-worn brothers and sisters.
They are now pleading with million tongues against those who have
dispoiled them. They cry from gory fields--from pestilential rice
swamps--from cane breaks, and forests--from plantations of cotton and
tabacco--from the dark holds of slave ships, and from countless acres
where the sugar cane nods to the sighing winds. They lift up their
voices from all the land over which the flag of our country floats.
From the banks of our silver streams, and broad rivers, from our
valleys and sloping hills, and mountain tops!

The silence that reigns in the region where the pale nations of the
earth slumber, is solemn, and awful. But what think ye, when you are
told that every rood of land in this Union is the grave of a murdered
man, and their epitaphs are written upon the monuments of the nation’s
wealth. Ye destroyers of my people draw near, and read the mournful
inscription; aye! read it, until it is daguerotyped on your souls.
“You have slain us all the day long--you have had no mercy.” Legions
of haggard ghosts stalk through the land. Behold! see, they come: Oh
what myriads! Hark hear their broken bones as they clatter together!
With deep unearthly voices they cry “We come, we come! for vengeance we
come! Tremble, guilty nation, for the God of Justice lives and reigns.”
The screaming of the eagle as he darts through lightning and storm
is unheard because of these voices. The tocsin of the sabbath, and
the solemn organ are mocked by them. They drown the preacher’s voice,
and produce discord in the sacred choirs. Sworn senators and perjured
demagogues, as they officiate around the alter of Moloch in the
national capitol, they hear the wailings of the victims of base born
democracy, and they are ill at ease in their unexampled hypocracy. The
father of waters, may roar in his progress to the ocean--the Niagara
may thunder, but these voices from the living and the dead, rise above
them all.

Such, ladies and gentlemen, are the outlines of the picture of the
Colored Race throughout the world. Behind us and on either side are
waste places, and deserts, but before us are green spots and living
springs.

The genius of slavery in this country has taken his course southward.
It has passed its Rubicon, the far distant Sabine. Infatuated with its
victories, it has pressed forward to the sandy shores of the Neuces,
where it paused but for a moment. It has Texas and moves on beyond the
Rio Del Norte.

  “Six slave states added at a breath! one flourish of a pen,
  And fetters are riveted on millions more of men,
  How all the damned leap up, and half forget their fire,
  To think men take such pains to claim the notice of God’s ire.”

Nor has it been satisfied when all this was done. It has laid its
hands upon the nation’s standard, and has urged its way through
flood, and field, until that blood-stained banner waves on the halls
of the Montazumas. It claims its victories on the ensanguined plains
of Monterey, Cero Gordo, Chepultepec, Churubusco, and Beuna Vista,
and hangs out its stiffened and gory garments from the old grey
walls of Vera Cruz. These are but a part of slavery’s conquests on
this continent. It is among the things that are possible that these
triumphs are defeats in disguise. “God taketh the wise in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the ungodly carries headlong.” I would
not dispair of the triumph of freedom in the hemisphere, were Mexico
to be annexed to this union. For one I would welcome my dark-browed
and liberty-loving brethren to our embrace. Aye! let them come with the
population of seven and a half millions. One fifth of that number are
white, and they are ultra Abolitionists. Two fifths are Indians, and
the other two fifths are of the black, and mixed races. I repeat it, I
should not dispair if they should come.

The dominions of slavery are directly between Northern and Southern
freedom--between Eastern and Western Democracy. In the East the sons of
New England are waking up at freedom’s call, among the tombs of their
fathers.

  “Grey Plymouth’s Rock hath yet a tongue, and Concord is not dumb.”

The men of the North begin to appreciate the doctrine which has been
long inculcated, that in order to be free themselves, they must
emancipate the bondmen. The young lion of the West has torn the net
of voluntary servitude, and gives signs of his latent strength. “The
peculiar Institution” is doomed. President Polk sees this, and he
spares neither blood, nor treasure to save it. Mr. John C. Calhoun is
aware of it, and like some mighty Collossus, he stands astride the
dark and troubled waters of his darling system, and like a frightened
girl, appeals piteously to his brethren of the North and the South,
to come to the rescue, and save him from a humiliating downfall. His
predicament is pictured, very correctly by the gifted and devoted Bard
of Liberty, JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

  “Where’s now the boast, which even thy guarded tongue,
  Cold, calm, and proud, in the teeth o’ the senate flung,
  O’er the fulfillment of thy baleful plan,
  Like Satan’s triumph, at the fall of man?
  How stood’st thou then, thy foot on Freedom planting,
  And pointing to the lurid heaven afar,
  Whence all could see through the south window’s slanting,
  Crimson as blood, the beams of the Lone star:
  The Fates are just; they give us but our own;
  Nemesis ripens what our hands have sown.
  There is an eastern story, not unknown,
  Doubtless to thee, of one whose magic skill,
  Call’d demons up his water jars to fill;
  Deftly, and silently they did his will,
  But when the task was done kept pouring still.
  In vain with spell, and charm the wizard wrought,
  Faster and faster were the buckets brought,
  Higher, and higher rose the flood around,
  Till the fiends clapped their hands above their master drowned.”

New and startling scenes are passing before us continually. No man of
common sense, will declare to-day, that he will not be on the side of
freedom to-morrow. All the while the Colored race, are increasing in a
ratio unprecedented in the history of any oppressed people.

The Spaniard conquered Mexico three hundred years ago. His impress
is scarcely preceptible upon it. Many of the chiefs of the country
are mixed blood, some of them pure Indian, while the population, as a
whole, is altogether mongrel.

But there is another race (the negro) “parallel, co-relative, and
inter-mixed with the Anglo-American. Include Texas, and go from the
East boundary of the Louisiana purchase, to the Rio Grande, thus:

  COLORED RACE,    1820.       1830.      1845.
  Louisiana,      79,500     124,000    245,000
  Missouri,       10,550      27,000     71,851
  Arkansas,        1,677       5,000     40,000
  Texas,           0,000       5,000     50,000
                  ------     -------    -------
    Total,        91,727     161,000    406,851

The slaves keep pace with the whites! If carried into Mexico, their
masters bring a colored race, and find one there! The oppressive
burdens of slavery, therefore, will keep down Anglo-American progress
in that direction!”
                                                 _Cincinnati Chronicle._

Who is there, after looking at these facts, will question the
probability of the assumption, that this republic, and this continent,
are to be the theatre in which the grand drama of our triumphant
Destiny is to be enacted.

The Red men of North America are retreating from the approach of the
white man. They have fallen like trees on the ground in which they
first took root, and on the soil which their foliage once shaded. But
the Colored race, although they have been transplanted in a foreign
land, have clung to and grown with their oppressors, as the wild ivy
entwines around the trees of the forest, nor can they be torn thence.
At this moment when so much feigned hatred is manifested toward us, our
blood is mixed with every tribe from Cape Horn to the Frozen Ocean.
Skillful men have set themselves to work at analyzation, and yet in
many cases they are perplexed in deciding where to draw the line
between the Negro and the Anglo-Saxon. Whatever our colorless brethren
say of themselves, so far do they proclaim our future position. Do they
say in proud exultation,

  “No pent up Utica contracts our powers,
  The whole boundless continent is ours,”

in this they bespeak our destiny.

There are those who, either from good or evil motives, plead for the
utopian plan of the Colonization of a whole race to the shores of
Africa. We are now colonized. We are planted here, and we cannot as a
whole people, be re-colonized back to our father-land. It is too late
to make a successful attempt to separate the black and white people in
the New World. They love one another too much to endure a separation.
Where one is, there will the other be also. Ruth, of the Old Testament,
puts the resolve of our destiny in our mouths, which we will repeat
to those who would expatriate us: “Entreat me not to leave thee nor
return from following after thee, for whither thou goest I will go, and
where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy
God shall be my God. Where thou diest there will I die, and there will
I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and more, if aught but death part
thee and me.”

_This western world is destined to be filled with a mixed race._
Statesmen, distinguished for their forecast, have gravely said that
the blacks must either be removed, or such as I have stated will be
the result. It is a stubborn fact, that it is impossible to separate
the pale man and the man of color, and therefore the result which to
them is so fearful, is inevitable. All this the wiser portion of the
Colonizationists see, and they labor to hinder it. It matters not
whether we abhor or desire such a consummation, it is now too late
to change the decree of nature and circumstances. As well might we
attempt to shake the Alleghanies with our hands, or to burst the rock
of Gibralter with our fists. If the colored people should all consent
to leave this country, on the day of their departure there would be
sore lamentations, the like of which the world has not heard since
Rachel wept for her children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not. We would insist upon taking all who have our generous and
prolific blood in their veins. In such an event, the American church
and state would be bereaved. The Reverend Francis L. Hawks, D. D., of
the Protestant Episcopal Church, a man who is receiving the largest
salary of any divine in the country, would be called upon to make
the sacrifice of leaving a good living, and to share the fate of his
brethren according to the flesh. The Reverend Dr. Murphy, of Herkimer,
N. Y., a Presbyterian, would be compelled to leave his beloved flock;
and how could they endure the loss of a shepherd so eloquent, so
faithful and so kind. We should be burdened with that _renegade
negro_ of the United States Senate, Mr. YULEE, of Florida. We should
take _one_ of the wives of Senator Samuel Houston. The consort,--the
beautiful Cleopatra of his Excellency, R. M. Johnson, late Democratic
Vice President of this great nation,--would be the foremost in the vast
company of exiles. After we all should return to tread the golden sands
of AFRICA, whether we would add to the morality of our kindred across
the deep waters future generations would decide. One thing I am certain
of, and that is, many of the slaveholders and lynchers of the South are
not very moral now. Our cousins of the tribe of Shem are welcome to our
deserters. If they are enriched by them they may be assured that we are
not impoverished.

On the other continent, the destiny of the colored people will
be similar to that of the people among whom they are scattered.
Colorphobia is confined almost entirely to the United States and the
Canadas. We speak of prejudice against color, but in fact, nothing of
the kind exists. The prejudice is against the condition alone. Were not
this the case the American feeling would pervade the whole earth.

Many things that were intended for evil to us, will result, I trust,
in good. The tyrants have debarred us from the wealth accruing from
trade and commerce. This is an evil. But may it not be hoped that we
are their juniors in the art of cheating? We have among us some arrant
cheats, but it is presumed that but a few will doubt that our white
brothers bear off the palm in this department of human depravity. The
besetting sins of the Anglo-Saxon race are, the love of gain and the
love of power. In many instances, while our services could be dispensed
with, we have not been permitted to join the army, and of course have
not been killed in the wars. We have been driven from the sanctuaries
where our oppressors worship, and it may be that we are not quite as
hypocritical as their practices have made them. When the great national
account shall be rendered before the tribunal of Justice, the guilt of
course must be borne by those who might have had, or who have used the
power of the government. There may, therefore, be some good that may
come out of this evil. But no thanks to the evil doers. Their works are
evil still, the good comes in spite of them.

The old doctrine of the natural inferiority of the colored race,
propagated in America by Mr. Thomas Jefferson, has long since been
refuted by Dr. John Mason Goode, and numerous respectable witnesses
from among the slandered, both living and dead: Pushkin in Russia,
Dumas in France, Toussaint in Hayti, Banaker, Theodore Sedgwick Wright,
and a host in America, and a brilliant galaxy in Ancient History.

There are blessings in store for our patient, suffering race,--there
is light and glory. The star of our hope is slowly and steadily rising
above the horizon. As a land that has long been covered by storm and
clouds, and shaken by the thunder, when the storms and clouds had
passed away, and the thunder was succeeded by a calm, like that which
cheered the first glad morning, and flower and shrub smiled as they
looked up to God, and the mountains, plains and valleys rung with
joy,--so shall this race come forth and re-occupy their station of
renown.

But how shall we hasten on that period? How shall we acquit ourselves
on the field where the great battle is to be fought? By following
after peace and temperance, industry and frugality, and love to God,
and to all men, and by resisting tyranny in the name of Eternal
Justice. We must also become acquainted with the arts and sciences,
and agricultural pursuits. These will elevate any people and sever any
chain.

We must also cherish and maintain a national and patriotic sentiment
and attachment. Some people of color say that they have no home, no
country. I am not among that number. It is empty declamation. It is
unwise. It is not logical--it is false. Of all the people in this wide
earth, among the countless hordes of misery, there is not one so poor
as to be without a home and a country. America is my home, my country,
and I have no other. I love whatever of good there may be in her
institutions. I hate her sins. I loathe her slavery, and I pray Heaven
that ere long she may wash away her guilt in tears of repentance.
I love the green-hills which my eyes first beheld in my infancy. I
love every inch of soil which my feet pressed in my youth, and I
mourn because the accursed shade of slavery rests upon it. I love my
country’s flag, and I hope that soon it will be cleansed of its stains,
and be hailed by all nations as the emblem of freedom and independence.




FOOTNOTES:


  [A] Rev. Beriah Green.

  [B] Numbers, 12 chap. 10 v.

  [C] The whole number of slaves in the French Colonies were almost
  300,000.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or alternate spelling which may have been in use at the time
  of publication has been retained.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PAST AND THE PRESENT CONDITION, AND THE DESTINY, OF THE COLORED RACE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


