The Project Gutenberg eBook of Novelties & Things: Made with Aunt Lydia's Heavy Rug Yarn
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Novelties & Things: Made with Aunt Lydia's Heavy Rug Yarn

Author: American Thread Company

Release date: June 2, 2020 [eBook #62306]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVELTIES & THINGS: MADE WITH AUNT LYDIA'S HEAVY RUG YARN ***

                                                                     39¢




                           STAR BOOK NO. 232
                           NOVELTIES & THINGS
                 Made with Aunt Lydia’s Heavy Rug Yarn


    [Illustration: American Thread Company Logo]

                            american thread
                 HIGH RIDGE PARK, STAMFORD, CONN. 06905
                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.




                               TANK DRESS


                     SIZES: Small, Medium and Large

    [Illustration: Tank Dress]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  6 (7, 8)—70 Yd Skeins Taupe
  1 (1, 1)—70 Yd. Skein each Orange and Watermelon
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size K OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 2 trc = 1 inch

Directions are given for Small size. Changes for Medium and Large sizes
are given in parentheses.

Width across front or back at underarm: 18 (19½, 21) inches

BACK: With Watermelon ch 74 (80, 86), 1 trc in 6th st from hook, * ch 1,
skip next st of ch, 1 trc in next st, repeat from * across ch, cut
Watermelon, attach Orange (when changing colors always complete last
half of last st with next color), turn. 2nd ROW: Ch 4 (counts as 1st
trc), 1 trc in each trc and in 4th st of end ch, 36 (39, 42) trc, cut
Orange, attach Taupe. Repeat 2nd row until back measures 25 (25, 26)
inches from beg. SHAPE ARMHOLES: Sl st to 4th trc, ch 4, 1 trc in each
trc to within last 3 sts, ch 4, turn. NEXT 4 ROWS: Work even in trc.
SHAPE SHOULDERS: Work across 8 sts (all sizes), cut yarn; skip 14 (17,
20) trc, attach yarn and complete 2nd shoulder to correspond, cut yarn.

FRONT: Work same as back to 2 rows after armhole shaping. Work back and
forth across 8 sts (all sizes) for 3 rows for 1 shoulder, cut yarn; skip
14 (17, 20) sts for neck, attach yarn and work 3 rows in trc for other
shoulder, cut yarn at end of last row.

FINISHING: Sew shoulder and side seams. With Orange work a row of sc all
around each armhole and neck edge, working 1 sc in each trc and 3 sc
over side of each trc, join, cut yarn. Attach Watermelon and work 1 sc
in each sc, join, cut yarn.

    [Illustration: NOVELTIES & THINGS (thumbnail of cover image)]




                                CONTENTS


  Tank Dress                                                           2
  Whisk Cover                                                          4
  Baby Bottle Cover                                                    4
  Piggy Bank                                                           5
  Black Eye Susan Pincushion                                           6
  Slack Set                                                            8
  Crocheted Vest                                                      10
  Webbing Tote Bag                                                    11
  Motif Throw                                                         12
  Hot Plate Mats                                                      14
  Fringe Rug                                                          17
  Snowman Door Stop                                                   18
  Boy & Girl Dolls                                                    19
  Santa Door Stop                                                     20
  Pencil Holder                                                       22
  Knitted Shawl                                                       23

  KNITTING ABBREVIATIONS

  Knit                       K
  Purl                       P
  Stitch(es)                 St(s)
  Yarn Over                  YO
  Decrease                   Dec.
  Increase                   Inc.
  Together                   Tog.
  Round                      Rnd.
  Pass Slip St Over St       P.s.s.o.
  Double Pointed Needle      dpn
  Do Not Work St, Row or     K-O
  Round
  Beginning                  Beg.
  Between                    Bet.

  CROCHET ABBREVIATIONS

  Chain                      ch
  Stitch                     st
  Slip Stitch                sl st
  Single Crochet             s c
  Short Double Crochet       s d c
  OR Half Double Crochet     h d c
  Double Crochet             d c
  Treble Crochet             tr c
  Double Treble Crochet      d tr c
  Treble Treble Crochet      tr tr c
  Increase                   inc
  Decrease                   dec
  Asterisk...*. This
  indicates that the
  directions immediately
  following are to be
  repeated the given
  number of times in
  addition to the ones
  already given. Thus
  “repeat from *3 times”
  means 4 patterns in all.




                              WHISK COVER


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Lt. Yellow, Pink and Leaf Green
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J

With Lt. Yellow, ** ch 3, * yo hook, insert hook in 1st ch, pull through
and work off 2 loops, repeat from * twice, yo and work off remaining
loops at one time, sl st in 1st ch (puff st), repeat from ** 5 times,
join in 1st puff st, cut yarn. 2nd ROUND: With wrong side of puff st
facing, attach Pink in back in space below any puff st, * ch 8, sl st in
2nd st from hook, sc in next ch, sdc in next st, (sdc: yo hook, insert
hook in st, pull through and work off all loops at one time), 1 dc in
each of next 3 chs, trc in last ch, sl st in next space below next puff
st, repeat from * all around, join. 3rd ROUND: Sl st in base of trc, *
ch 1, sl st in base of next st, repeat from * all around working in base
of each st on right side of petal and in top of each st on left side of
petal, join, cut yarn. 4th ROUND: Attach Leaf Green in back loops of sc
in back of any petal, * 3 trc in back loops between next 2 petals, sl st
in sc of next petal, repeat from * all around, join. 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th
and 9th ROUNDS: Ch 3, 1 dc in each st, join, cut yarn. Place over whisk
broom.




                           BABY BOTTLE COVER


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein Med. Pink
  10 Yds. Buttercup
  1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 10½ OR ANY SIZE NEEDLES WHICH WILL RESULT
          IN STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J
  1—7 inch Pink CONMAR “NO/SNAG” SKIRT ZIPPER
  ¾ Yd. narrow Blue ribbon
  ½ Yd. medium Blue ribbon
  Scraps of Black and Red felt
  Kapok for filling
  1 baby bottle
  GAUGE: 3 sts = 1 inch

BODY: With Pink cast on 22 sts. K each row until work measures 10
inches, bind off. Thread yarn into blunt needle and gather cast on edge
together tightly for bottom. Sew zipper in side seam sewing remainder of
seam together. Gather tightly directly above zipper for neck. Fill Head
with kapok and gather top together tightly. ARMS: (MAKE 2): With Pink
cast on 10 sts. K each row until work measures 3 inches, bind off. Sew
seam and gather one end tightly together. Fill with kapok and attach to
body as illustrated.

HAIR: With Buttercup, ch 4, join to form a ring, sl st in ring, * insert
hook in ring, draw yarn through loop and up to a 2½ inch length, hold
loop on hook, holding loops on hook repeat from * 19 times dropping
loops when necessary, cut yarn, fasten securely. Work a 2nd loop group
with 12 loops only, cut yarn, fasten. Attach 12 loop group on top of 20
loop group and attach to top of head.

FACE: Cut features from felt as illustrated and glue in place. Insert
bottle.

    [Illustration: Whisk Cover]

    [Illustration: Baby Bottle Cover]




                               PIGGY BANK


    [Illustration: Piggy Bank]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein Natural and
  “STAR” SIX STRAND MERCERIZED EMBROIDERY COTTON
  1 Skein. each Peacock #1115; Bright Pink No. 2 #1106 and Black #1151.
  Steel Crochet Hook No. 7 and Aluminum Crochet Hook Size I OR ANY SIZE
          HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  Scraps of Black felt
  Kapok for filling
  1—4 Oz. plastic baby bottle
  GAUGE: For size I hook: 5 sts = 2 inches

Cut a 1 inch slot on side of bottle having end of slot 1 inch from
bottom of bottle. With Natural and size I hook ch 2, 10 sc in 2nd st
from hook, do not join or turn this or following rounds. Place a marker
at beg of each round. 2nd ROUND: Working in back loop of sts only, 1 sc
in each sc. 3rd ROUND: Working in both loops, 1 sc in each sc. 4th
ROUND: Sc in next sc, 2 sc in next sc, repeat from beg all around (15
sc), join this and following rounds, ch 1 to turn all rounds. 5th ROUND:
1 sc in each sc. 6th ROUND: Working in sc inc in every 3rd SC (20 sc).
7th ROUND: Inc in every 5th sc (24 sc). NEXT 4 ROUNDS: 1 sc in each sc.
12th ROW: DIVIDE FOR COIN SLOT: 1 sc in each of 1st 12 sc, ch 1, turn.
NEXT 4 ROWS: 1 sc in each of the 12 sc, cut yarn. Attach yarn in 1st
free sc of 11th round, sc in same space, 1 sc in each of next 11 sc, ch
1, turn. NEXT 4 ROWS: 1 sc in each sc of the 12 sc; join to 1st sc of
opposite section in last round, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROUND: 1 sc in each sc
of each section, join in 1st sc, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROUND: 1 sc in each
sc, join in 1st sc, drop yarn. Leaving slot open, sew other opening
closed. Fill snout with kapok; then insert bottle having slot and
opening of cover tog. Place kapok around bottle shaping as illustrated.
NEXT ROUND: Pick up dropped yarn, * 1 sc in each of 1st 4 sc, dec in
next 2 sts (to dec: pull up a loop in each of 2 sts, yarn over and work
off all loops, at one time), repeat from * all around, join, ch 1, turn.
NEXT ROUND: Dec in every 3rd and 4th st, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROUND: 1 sc in
each st, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROUND: Dec in every 2 sts, join, cut yarn
leaving a length for sewing. Fill remainder of body section with kapok.
Thread the length of yarn into blunt needle, draw all sts tog, fasten
securely. Glue slot opening to bottle opening.

EARS: (MAKE 2): Ch 4, 1 sc in 2nd st from hook and in each remaining st
of ch, ch 1 to turn all rows. 2nd ROW: Dec in 1st 2 sts, sc in next sc.
3rd ROW: Dec in the 2 sts, cut yarn. Sew in position.

TAIL: Ch 15, cut yarn leaving a length for sewing. Thread yarn into
blunt needle and draw through all sts, fasten securely. Sew in position.

FEET: (MAKE 4): Ch 2, 8 sc in 2nd st from hook, do not join or turn. 2nd
ROUND: Working in back loop of sts, 1 sc in each sc. NEXT ROUND: Working
in both loops of sts, 1 sc in each sc, join, cut yarn leaving a length
for sewing. Fill with kapok and sew in position.

EYES AND NOSE: Cut 2 eyes from Black felt shaping as illustrated. Cut 2
tiny dots of Black felt for nose. Glue in position.

FLOWERS: (Make 5 of each Peacock and Bright Pink No. 2): With “STAR” SIX
STRAND EMBROIDERY COTTON and No. 7 hook ch 9, sl st in 2nd st from hook,
4 dc in next st of ch, * sl st in next st of ch, 4 dc in next st, repeat
from * across ch, cut thread leaving a length for sewing. Thread length
into needle and draw all sts tog, fasten securely. With Black work a
French knot (3 times over needle) in center of each flower. Sew flowers
in position.




                       BLACK EYE SUSAN PINCUSHION


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Brown and Buttercup
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size I OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  Kapok for filling
  GAUGE: 3 sc = 1 inch

FLOWER: With Brown ch 2, 6 sc in 2nd st from hook, do not join or turn
this or following rounds. Place a marker at beg of each round. 2nd
ROUND: 2 sc in each sc. 3rd ROUND: Sc in next sc, 2 sc in next sc,
repeat from beg all around. 4th ROUND: 1 sc in each of the next 5 sc, 2
sc in next sc, repeat from beg all around. NEXT 3 ROUNDS: 1 sc in each
sc. 8th ROUND: 1 sc in each of the next 5 sc, dec in next 2 sts (to dec:
pull up a loop in each of the 2 sts, yo and pull through all loops at
one time), repeat from beg all around, join, cut yarn. NEXT ROUND:
Attach Buttercup in any sc, ch 6, sc in 2nd st from hook, sc in next st
of ch, sdc in next st (sdc: yarn over hook, insert hook in st, pull yarn
through, yo and pull through all loops at one time), 1 dc in each of
next 2 sts, sl st in same st with ch (petal), * sl st in next sc, ch 6,
work a petal, sl st in same sc, repeat from * all around, cut yarn.

LOWER SECTION: With Brown work 1st 3 rounds same as flower. 4th ROUND: 1
sc in each sc, cut yarn.

FINISHING: The wrong side of work will be right side of flower. Fill
Brown section of flower with kapok. Place lower section over opening and
sew in position to last round of Brown section of flower. With Brown
work a chain long enough to go around flower, cut yarn leaving a length
for sewing. Thread yarn into blunt needle and sew chain in position.

    [Illustration: Pincushion]




                               SLACK SET


                     SIZES: Small, Medium and Large

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  8 (9, 10)—70 Yd. Skeins Red and
  5 (5, 6)—70 Yd. Skeins Black for Poncho
  13 (13, 14)—70 Yd. Skeins Black for Slacks
  ½ inch wide Black Elastic
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 2—ch 2 meshes with 2 dc between = 2 inches

Directions are given for Small size. Changes for Medium and Large sizes
are given in parentheses.


PONCHO

BACK: With Red, * ch 20, dc in 4th ch from hook, 2 dc in same space, 3
dc in each st across ch to within last st of ch, 1 dc, 2 trc in last st,
ch 30, work in same manner as last ch, repeat from * 9 (10, 11) times,
ch 20, work in same manner, cut yarn; 21 (23, 25) scrolls. Attach Black
in top of side of last trc of last scroll, ch 3, dc in same space,
working across top and having right side of all scrolls facing, * ch 2,
2 dc in top of next scroll, repeat from * across row ending 2 dc in last
st. 2nd ROW: (dec row): Place a marker at center mesh, ch 5, * 2 dc in
next ch 2 mesh, ch 2, repeat from * to within center mesh, work 1 dc in
center mesh, 1 dc in next mesh (1 pattern dec), * ch 2, 2 dc in next
mesh, repeat from last * across row ending with ch 2, dc in 3rd st of
ch, ch 3, turn. 3rd ROW: Dc in 1st mesh, * ch 2, 2 dc in next mesh,
repeat from * across row, ch 5, turn. 4th ROW: 2 dc in 1st mesh, * ch 2,
2 dc in next mesh, repeat from * across row ending with ch 2, dc in 3rd
st of ch. Repeat last 2 rows for pattern. 5th ROW: Work even in pattern.
6th ROW: Repeat 2nd row (dec row) being certain to have same amount of
meshes each side of dec. 7th ROW: Work even in pattern. Repeat last 2
rows 4 times (all sizes). 16th ROW: Work in pattern dec 2 patterns at
center by working 1 dc in each of the 3 center meshes, cut yarn.

FRONT: Work same as back but reversing scrolls by starting and ending
with large scrolls.

FINISHING: Weave 4 (4, 4½) inches tog on each side of top for shoulders.
Weave 1st 8 rows of Black tog on both sides leaving remainder free for
armhole opening.

EDGE: Attach Black at left shoulder seam at neck edge, * ch 1, sl st in
next st, repeat from * all around neck edge. Attach yarn at underarm and
work around armholes in same manner working 2 sl sts with ch 1 between
on sides of each row, 1 sl st with ch 1 in top of st, join, cut yarn.


SLACKS

1st LEG: With Black ch 76 (80, 84), dc in 4th st from hook, * ch 2, skip
2 sts of ch, 1 dc in each of next 2 sts, repeat from * across ch. Then
work even in pattern same as poncho for 23 inches (all sizes) or desired
length, ending with 3rd row of pattern, ch 3 to turn at end of last row.

SHAPE CROTCH: 1st ROW: (Inc row): Dc in same space, * ch 2, 2 dc in next
mesh, repeat from * across row ending with ch 2, 2 dc in 3rd st of end
ch, ch 5, turn. 2nd ROW: Work even in pattern, ch 3, turn. 3rd ROW:
Repeat 1st inc row ending ch 3, turn. 4th ROW: (Dec row): 1 dc in next
mesh, * ch 2, 2 dc in next mesh, repeat from * across row ending with 1
dc in last mesh, 1 dc in 3rd st of ch, ch 3, turn. Repeat last row 3
times, ch 5 to turn at end of last repeat. Work even in pattern for 7
(7½, 8) inches, cut yarn. Work a 2nd leg in same manner.

FINISHING: Matching rows, fold leg lengthwise and sew seam to last inc
point of crotch. Then sew front and back of 1st leg to front and back of
2nd leg. Work a row of sl sts across top of slacks. Lace elastic through
meshes at top.

    [Illustration: Slack Set]




                             CROCHETED VEST


                SIZES: Small to Medium; Medium to Large

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  6 (7)—70 Yd. Skeins Natural
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 2 shells = 3 inches

Directions are given for Small to Medium size. Changes for Medium to
Large size are given in parentheses.

  Width across back at underarm:
    16½ (18) inches
  Width across each front at underarm:
    9 (10½) inches

BACK: Ch 68 (74), sc in 2nd st from hook, * skip next 2 sts of ch, 1 dc,
ch 3, 1 dc (shell) in next st, skip next 2 sts of ch, sl st in next st,
repeat from * across ch ending last repeat with sc, turn. 2nd ROW: Ch 5,
sl st in center st of next shell, repeat from beg across row ending with
ch 2, dc in last sc, ch 1, turn. 3rd ROW: Sc in dc, * shell in next sl
st, sl st in center st of next loop, repeat from * across row ending
last repeat with sc in 3rd st of end ch, turn. Repeat last 2 rows until
back measures 18 (19) inches from beg or length desired to underarm
ending with 2nd pattern row. NEXT ROW: SHAPE ARMHOLES: sl st to 2nd st
of next ch 5 loop, sc in next st, work in pattern across row to 2nd ch 5
loop from end ending with sc, ch 5, turn. Work even in pattern until
armholes measure 9½ (10) inches from beg ending with 2nd pattern row.
NEXT ROW: SHAPE SHOULDERS: Sc in dc, * shell in next sl st, sl st in
center st of next loop, repeat from * once, cut yarn. Skip next 4 (5) ch
5 loops, attach yarn in center st of next loop, sc in same space, work
shoulder to correspond to opposite shoulder.

LEFT FRONT: Ch 38 (44), work same as back to underarm ending with same
row.

NEXT ROW: SHAPE ARMHOLE AND FRONT EDGE: Sl st to 2nd st of next ch 5
loop, sc in next st, work in pattern to within 1 loop from end, dc in
next sl st, dc in 3rd st of end ch, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl st in
center of next shell, repeat from beg 3 (4) times, ch 2, dc in next sc,
ch 1, turn. NEXT ROW: Work even in pattern working sc in last ch 5 loop.
NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl st in next shell, repeat from beg 3 (4) times, ch 2,
dc in last sc, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROW: Sc in dc, * shell in next sl st, sl
st in next loop, repeat from * 2 (3) times, dc in next sl st, sc in next
loop, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl st in next shell, repeat from beg 2 (3)
times, ch 2, dc in sc, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROW: Sc in dc, * shell in next
sl st, sl st in next loop, repeat from * 2 (3) times, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch
5, sl st in next shell, repeat from beg 2 (3) times, ch 2, dc in sc, ch
1, turn. NEXT ROW: Sc in dc, * shell in next sl st, sl st in next loop,
repeat from * 1 (2) times, dc in next sl st, sc in end ch, turn. FOR
MEDIUM TO LARGE SIZE ONLY: Repeat last 4 rows once. For both sizes,
continue in pattern until armhole has same number of rows as back
armhole, cut yarn.

RIGHT FRONT: Work same as back to underarm ending with same row, ch 3,
turn. NEXT ROW: Dc in next sl st, sl st in center st of next ch 5 loop,
* shell in next sl st, sl st in center of next ch 5 loop, repeat from *
3 (4) times, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl st in center st of next shell,
repeat from beg 3 (4) times, ch 5, sc in 3rd st of end ch, ch 3, turn.
NEXT ROW: sl st in center st of next loop, shell in next sl st, repeat
from beg 3 (4) times, sc in 3rd st of end ch, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl
st in center of next shell, repeat from beg 3 (4) times, dc in 3rd st of
end ch, ch 3, turn. NEXT ROW: sl st in center of next ch 5 loop, shell
in next sl st, repeat from beg 2 (3) times, sc in 3rd st of end ch,
turn. NEXT ROW: Ch 5, sl st in center of next shell, repeat from beg 2
(3) times, ch 2, dc in 3rd st of end ch, ch 1, turn. NEXT ROW: Shell in
next sl st, sl st in center of next ch 5 loop, repeat from beg across
row ending last repeat with sc in 3rd st of end ch, turn. NEXT ROW: Ch
5, sl st in center of next shell, repeat from beg 2 (3) times, ch 1,
turn. NEXT ROW: Sl st in center of next ch 5 loop, shell in next sl st,
repeat from beg 1 (2) times, sc in 3rd st of end ch. FOR MEDIUM TO LARGE
SIZE ONLY: Repeat last 4 rows once. For both sizes, continue in pattern
until armhole has same number of rows as left front, cut yarn.

FINISHING: Block each section slightly. Sew side and shoulder seams.
EDGE: Attach yarn in lower corner of right front, sl st, ch 2, sl st in
same space, working up front, * sc on side of next sc, sl st, ch 2, sl
st in next loop, repeat from * up front, around back of neck and down
opposite side, then sl st in each st across starting ch, join, cut yarn.
Work edge around each armhole in same manner.

TIES: (Make 2): Work a ch 1½ yards long, sl st in 2nd st from hook and
in each remaining st of ch, cut yarn leaving a length for sewing. Thread
length into blunt needle, sew to front of vest as illustrated.

    [Illustration: Vest]




                            WEBBING TOTE BAG


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Lilac, Jade, Peacock and Lt. Yellow and
  “AUNT LYDIA’S” CARPET AND BUTTON THREAD
  1—70 Yd. Spool Army Drab
  Tapestry Needle
  1 Roll furniture webbing
  ½ Yd. Lining

    [Illustration: Embroidery Pattern]

With “AUNT LYDIA’S” CARPET AND BUTTON THREAD whip one end of webbing to
prevent ravelling. Embroider over the colored threads of each strip
according to the illustration above. Working along upper stripe of
colored threads with Jade insert needle up and under 5th colored thread
from right hand end on last row of colored threads, insert needle down
and under 7th colored thread from end of 1st row of colored threads, *
skip next 3 colored threads of last row, up and under next colored
thread of same row, skip next 3 colored threads of 1st row, down and
under next colored thread of same row, repeat from * until there are 24
complete points along outer edge (center of chevron pattern), cut
webbing on 5th colored thread from last st. Overcast edge. NEXT ROW:
With Peacock insert needle up and under 5th colored thread directly
above 1st Jade st from right hand end, down and under 1 thread above 1st
Jade point, up and under colored thread above next Jade st, continue
across row in same manner. NEXT ROW: With Lilac work same as last row.
Turn strip and work other half of chevron to correspond. Embroider other
colored stripe in same manner. With Lt. Yellow, work a row of cross sts
in center between points as shown. Work 3 more strips in same manner.
Cut a strip of webbing 36 inches long for center allowing for handle.
Embroider same as other strips. Whip st 2 strips together matching
embroidery for each side. Then whip each section to center strip.
Embroider French knots in Lt. Yellow as shown in illustration.

FINISHING: LINING: Cut lining in shape of tote and handle allowing ¾
inch for seams. Seam and sew in place. Turn top edge of tote to inside
and sew to lining. Line handle.




                              MOTIF THROW


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  16—70 Yd. Skeins Leaf Green
  6—70 Yd. Skeins each Coral and Folly Pink
  3—70 Yd. Skeins Yellow
  2—70 Yd. Skeins Cerise
  1—70 Yd. Skein Watermelon
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          MOTIF GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: Each motif measures 8 inches (point to point)

MOTIF: Work 1st 3 rounds same as Whisk Cover on page 4. 4th ROUND: Same
as Whisk Cover but work 5 trc between each petal, join. 5th ROUND: Ch 3,
3 trc in space before trc group, * 4 trc in space on other side of same
trc group, ch 3, 4 trc in space on other side of same petal (shell),
repeat from * all around ending to correspond, join, cut yarn. Work 43
motifs working 18 motifs with Coral; 18 motifs with Folly Pink: 4 motifs
with Cerise and 3 motifs with Watermelon.

FINISHING: Sew motifs together through back loop of sts having 3 motifs
in 1st row, * 2 motifs in next row, 3 motifs in next row, repeat from *
until all motifs are joined arranging colors as illustrated:

    [Illustration: Motif Throw]

EDGE: Working across 1 short end attach Leaf Green in ch 3 loop of 1st
shell on side of 1st motif, ch 4, 3 trc in same space, ch 3, 4 trc in
same space, * ch 3, 4 trc, ch 3, 4 trc shell in ch 3 loop of next shell,
repeat from * once, ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 space of same motif, ch 3,
4 trc in ch 3 space of next motif, ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 space of
same motif, ch 3, 4 trc in ch 3 space of next motif, * ch 3, 4 trc shell
in ch 3 loop of next shell, repeat from last * once, * ch 3, 4 trc in ch
3 loop of same motif, ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 loop of next motif,
repeat from last * once, * ch 3, 4 trc shell in next ch 3 loop, repeat
from last * twice (2nd corner), * ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 loop of same
motif, ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 loop of next motif, ch 3, 4 trc shell in
ch 3 loop of next shell, repeat from last * 6 times, ch 3, 4 trc in next
ch 3 loop of same motif, ch 3, 4 trc in next ch 3 loop of next motif, ch
3, 4 trc shell in next shell, repeat from 1st * all around ending to
correspond, join. 2nd ROUND: Sl st to loop, ch 4, 4 trc, ch 3, 5 trc in
same space, 5 trc in next ch 3 loop, 5 trc, ch 3, 5 trc (5 trc shell) in
next shell, 5 trc in next ch 3 loop, 5 trc shell in next shell, * sc in
next ch 3 loop, 5 trc shell in next shell, repeat from * 6 times, * 5
trc in next ch 3 loop, 5 trc shell in next shell, repeat from last *
once, * sc in next ch 3 loop, 5 trc shell in next shell, repeat from
last * 15 times, continue all around working remaining side and corners
to correspond, join. 3rd ROUND: Ch 1, sl st in next st, repeat from beg
all around, cut yarn.




                             HOT PLATE MATS


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Buttercup and Peach will make 1 large and 1 small
          mat
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 3 sc = 1 inch
  Approximate Sizes: large Mat 13½ inches in diameter, small Mat 9½
          inches in diameter.


LARGE MAT

With Buttercup ch 5, join to form a ring, 8 sc in ring, do not join or
turn this or following rounds. Place a marker at beg of each round. 2nd
ROUND: 3 sc in each st. 3rd and 4th ROUNDS: 1 sc in each st. 5th ROUND:
Sc in next sc, 2 sc in next sc, repeat from beg all around. 6th ROUND:
Inc in every 3rd st. 7th ROUND: Inc in every 4th st. 8th and 9th ROUNDS:
Work even ending with sl st in last 3 sts at end of last round, cut
yarn. 10th ROUND: Attach Peach in any st, * ch 11, sl st in 2nd ch from
hook, sc in next st, sdc in next st (sdc: yarn over hook, insert hook in
st, pull yarn through, yarn over and pull through all loops at one
time), 1 dc in each of next 3 chs, 1 trc in each of next 3 chs, 1 d trc
(3 times over hook) in next ch, skip 3 sts, sl st in next st, repeat
from * all around, join. 11th ROUND: * Sl st in base of each st to top
of point, then sl st in back loop of each st down opposite side, sl st
in back loop of next sl st, repeat from * around all points, join, cut
yarn. With Peach work a double lazy daisy st over 3 rows working from
center st of each petal (double daisy st: work 1 lazy daisy st, then
work a 2nd lazy daisy st around 1st lazy daisy st).


SMALL MAT

With Peach work 1st 5 rounds same as large mat. 6th ROUND: Work even (48
sts), cut yarn. 7th ROUND: Attach Buttercup in any st, * ch 9, sl st in
2nd ch from hook, sc in next ch, sdc in next ch, 1 dc in each of next 2
chs, 1 trc in each of next 3 chs, skip next 3 sts, sl st in next st,
repeat from * all around, join. 8th ROUND: * Sl st in back loop of each
sl st, sl st in back loop of each st, repeat from * around all points,
join, cut yarn. Work double lazy daisy st with Buttercup in same manner
as large mat.

    [Illustration: Large and Small Mats]

    [Illustration: Fringe Rug, Snowman, and Dolls]




                               FRINGE RUG


               APPROXIMATE SIZE: Finished: 27 x 42 inches

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  8—70 Yd. Skeins Antique
  9—70 Yd. Skeins Emerald
  6—70 Yd. Skeins Chartreuse
  3—70 Yd. Skeins each Fern Green and Orange
  2—70 Yd. Skeins Forest Green
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 1 sc, ch 1, 1 sc = 1 inch; 5 rows = 2 inches

FOUNDATION: With Antique ch 76, sc in 2nd st from hook, * ch 1, skip
next st of ch, sc in next st of ch, repeat from * across ch, ch 1 to
turn all rows. 2nd ROW: Sc in sc, * ch 1, sc in next sc, repeat from *
across row. Repeat 2nd row 97 times, cut yarn.

FRINGE: Work over each ch 1 space according to illustrations #1, #2, #3
and #4 on page 18. Work in colors according to chart at right. Thread a
double strand of yarn into a tapestry needle. Starting in 1st ch 1 space
in lower left corner work according to illustration #1. Continue
according to steps #2 and #3 to complete 1 fringe. Start at #4 for next
fringe and work #2 and #3. Always start with illustration #1 when
changing colors.

    [Illustration: FRINGE RUG PATTERN]

    [Illustration: FRINGE RUG COLOR KEY]

  ORANGE 226
  EMERALD 292
  FERN GREEN 293
  FOREST GREEN 295
  CHARTREUSE 296

    [Illustration: FRINGE RUG ILLUSTRATION]




                           SNOWMAN DOOR STOP


                       ILLUSTRATION ON [PAGE 16]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  4—70 Yd. Skeins White
  3—70 Yd. Skeins Black
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  Scraps of Red Felt for Nose and Mouth
  4 x 36 inch material for scarf
  Kapok for filling
  GAUGE: 3 sc = 1 inch

With White work Body, Arms and Head same as Santa Door Stop on page 20.
With Black, work Belt and Feet same as Santa Door Stop.

HAT: With Black ch 2, 6 sc in 2nd st from hook, do not join or turn this
or any following rounds. Place a marker at beg of each round. 2nd ROUND:
2 sc in each sc. 3rd ROUND: 1 sc in next sc, 2 sc in next sc, repeat
from beg all around. 4th ROUND: Working in sc inc in every 3rd sc. 5th
ROUND: Inc in every 4th sc. 6th ROUND: Inc in every 5th sc. 7th ROUND:
Inc in every 6th sc (42 sc.) 8th ROUND: Sl st in 1st 2 sc, working in
back loop of sts, 1 sc in each sc and in the 2 sl sts at beg of round.
9th ROUND: Working through both loops of sts, 1 sc in each sc. 10th
ROUND: Working in sc dec 6 sts evenly spaced. 11th ROUND: Work even in
sc. 12th ROUND: Repeat 10th round (30 sc). NEXT 6 ROUNDS: Work even in
sc. 19th ROUND: 2 sc in each sc. NEXT 4 ROUNDS: Work even in sc. NEXT
ROUND: Work 1 sl st in each st, cut yarn.

EAR MUFFS: (MAKE 2): Wind Black 40 times over a 2½ inch cardboard, slip
off cardboard and tie in center. Cut both ends and trim.

EYES AND BUTTONS: (MAKE 4): With Black ch 2, 6 sc in 2nd st from hook,
do not join. NEXT ROUND: 1 sc in next sc, 2 sc in next sc, repeat from
beg all around, join, cut yarn.

FINISHING: Assemble same as Santa Door Stop on page 22. Sew earmuffs,
eyes and buttons in position as illustrated. Cut nose and mouth from Red
felt. Glue in position.

SCARF: Sew long edges of material tog.

FRINGE: Cut 2—5 inch lengths of Black, fold in half. Pull loop through
material and pull ends through loop. Work 8 fringes on each short end of
material. Trim fringe evenly.




                            BOY & GIRL DOLLS


                       ILLUSTRATION ON [PAGE 16]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Cream and Med. Blue for Boy
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Med. Pink and White for Girl
  1—70 Yd. Skein Orange—For each doll
  2 Yds. ⅜ inch Blue ribbon for Girl
  6 inches 1¼ inch grosgrain ribbon for Boy’s tie
  Scraps of Red, Blue and Black felt for features
  Kapok or shredded foam rubber for filling
  1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 10½ OR ANY SIZE NEEDLES WHICH WILL RESULT
          IN STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  Plastic Crochet Hook Size J
  GAUGE: 10 sts = 3 inches

Directions are given for Boy. Changes for Girl are given in parentheses.

HEAD: With Cream (Pink) cast on 20 sts. Work in stockinette st (P 1 row,
K 1 row) for 3½ inches ending with P row (K side of work is right side
of face, arms and legs). NEXT ROW: BEADING: K 1, * yo, K 2 tog, repeat
from * across row ending last repeat with K 1.

BODY: K across 21 sts (reverse stockinette st). Starting with P row,
work even until section measures 10 inches from beg ending with K row.
NEXT ROW: K across 10 sts (1st leg), dec 1 st, K across last 10 sts
(other leg). Work over last 10 sts only in reverse stockinette st (P 1
row, K 1 row) for 3 inches ending with K row, then K 1 row, P 1 row to
reverse stockinette st for 1½ inches more. Bind off 2 sts tog each time
across row. Work across other 10 sts to correspond for other leg.

ARMS: (MAKE 2): With Cream (Pink) cast on 10 sts. Work in same pattern
as legs, bind off. Draw sts at top of head tog. Weave leg and back seams
tog leaving an opening at center back. Fill head section with kapok or
shredded foam rubber. Draw a double strand of yarn through beading; tie
tightly and wrap yarn once around neck, tie again. Fill body and legs.
Sew opening closed. Weave arm seams and fill with kapok. Sew arms in
position.

BOY’S OVERALLS: With Med. Blue cast on 15 sts (leg). Work in stockinette
st (P 1 row, K 1 row) for 4 inches ending with P row, cut yarn and leave
sts on needle. With free needle cast on 15 sts for other leg. Work in
same manner as 1st leg; then work across both legs (30 sts) for 3½
inches ending with P row. BIB: Bind off 10 sts, K next 9 sts, bind off
remaining sts, cut yarn. Attach yarn and work across center 10 sts (P 1
row, K 1 row) for about 2 inches. STRAPS: Then K across 3 sts, bind off
4 sts. Work across remaining sts in stockinette st for 5 inches, cut
yarn. Attach yarn to 1st st of other side of bib and work other strap to
correspond, cut yarn. Block and weave leg and back seams. Place over
doll. Cross straps in back and sew in position.

GIRL’S DRESS: SKIRT: With White ch 33 sc in 2nd st from hook, * ch 3, sc
in next ch, repeat from * to within last st, ch 1, dc in last st, (this
brings yarn in position for next row), ch 1, turn. 2nd ROW: Sl st in 1st
loop, * ch 3, sl st in next loop, repeat from * across row ending with
ch 1, dc in end st. Repeat 2nd row 8 times, cut yarn.

BODICE: Working along starting ch, attach yarn in 13th loop from end, ch
1, sc in same space, * ch 3, sl st in next loop, repeat from * 5 times,
ch 1, dc in next loop, ch 1, turn. Repeat 2nd row of skirt 4 times.
SHOULDER STRAPS: Sl st in 1st loop, ch 1, dc in next loop, ch 1, turn.
NEXT ROW: Sl st in 1st loop, ch 1, dc in sl st, ch 1, turn. Repeat 2nd
row of skirt 11 times, cut yarn. Skip 3 loops, attach yarn in next loop,
ch 1, dc in next loop, ch 1, turn. Complete same as 1st strap. Sew back
seam. Cross straps in back, stitch in place. Place over doll and sew at
shoulders and along waistline.

FINISHING: HAIR: Open skein of Orange. Smooth flat. Cut a 9 (24) inch
length. Place on top of head and sew strands at center to head to form
part. Cut a few strands at center for bangs. Trim boys hair to desired
length. Divide each side of girls hair in 3 parts. Braid and tie about
1½ inches from end. FEATURES: Cut features from felt as illustrated and
glue in position. Draw ribbon through 1st row of skirt. Finish with bow
at back. Sew a bow to front of dress at neck edge. Tie a ribbon around
each braid and finish with bow. Place a bow at neck edge of boy doll.




                            SANTA DOOR STOP


  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  5—70 Yd. Skeins Red
  2—70 Yd. Skeins White
  1—70 Yd. Skein each Black and Natural
  Kapok for filling
  Scraps of Black and Red felt for features
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size J OR ANY SIZE HOOK WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: 3 sc = 1 inch

BODY: With Red, ch 4, join to form a ring. Ch 1, 8 sc in ring, do not
join or turn this or following rounds. Place a marker at beg of each
round. 2nd ROUND: 2 sc in each sc. 3rd ROUND: Sc in next sc, 2 sc in
next sc, repeat from beg all around. NEXT 5 ROUNDS: Inc 8 sts evenly
spaced in each round (64 sc). NEXT 3 ROUNDS: Work even in sc. 12th
ROUND: Inc in every 8th st. 13th ROUND: Inc in every 9th st (80 sc).
14th ROUND: Working through back loop and loop in back of st, 1 sc in
each st. 15th ROUND: Working through both loops, 1 sc in each st. Repeat
last round for 3 inches. Cut 2 cardboard circles 9 inches in diameter
and insert in body. Continue in sc dec 10 sts evenly spaced every inch 6
times (to dec: insert hook in st, pull loop through, insert hook in next
st, pull loop through, yarn over and pull through all loops at one
time). Then work 2 rounds even, cut yarn. Fill with kapok.

ARMS: (MAKE 2): With Natural, ch 2, 6 sc in 2nd st from hook. 2nd ROUND:
1 sc in next st, 2 sc in next st, repeat from beg twice (9 sc). 3rd
ROUND: 1 sc in each st. 4th ROUND: Working in sc inc in every 3rd st (12
sc). 5th ROUND: 1 sc in each st, cut Natural, attach Red (when changing
colors always complete last half of last st with next color). NEXT 12
ROUNDS: Work even in sc. TOP OF ARM: Sl st in each of next 3 sts, 1 sc
in each of next 7 sts, sl st in each of next 7 sts, 1 sc in each of next
5 sts, cut yarn. Fill with kapok.

HEAD: With Natural ch 20, join to form a ring being careful not to twist
ch. 1st ROUND: Ch 1, 1 sc in each st, do not join or turn this or
following rounds. NEXT 2 ROUNDS: 1 sc in each st. NEXT ROUND: 2 sc in
each st (40 sc). Work even in sc until head measures 3 inches from last
inc round. NEXT 2 ROUNDS: Dec 10 sts evenly spaced in each round. NEXT 2
ROUNDS: Dec in every 2 sts in each round; then pull last sts tog, cut
yarn. Fill with kapok.

BELT: With Black ch 2, 1 sc in 2nd st from hook, ch 1 to turn all rows.
NEXT ROW: 3 sc in sc. NEXT ROW: 1 sc in each st. Repeat last row until
belt measures 30 inches, cut yarn.

FEET: (MAKE 2): With Black ch 9, 1 sc in 2nd st from hook and each
remaining st of ch (8 sc), ch 1 to turn all rows. NEXT 8 ROWS: 1 sc in
each sc, cut yarn at end of last row. Fold work in half lengthwise. Sew
1 short end tog (heel). Attach yarn in 5th st from opposite end, sc in
same space, 1 sc in each of the next 3 sc, 1 sc in each of the next 4
sts of starting ch, join in 1st sc (leg section). NEXT ROUND: Inc. in
every 2nd st (12 sc). NEXT 3 ROUNDS: 1 sc in each sc, join last round,
cut yarn. Sew toe and instep seam. Fill with kapok.

    [Illustration: Santa Door Stop]

HAT: With Red, ch 40, join to form a ring being careful not to twist ch.
1st ROUND: 1 sc in each st of ch. NEXT 3 ROUNDS: 1 sc in each sc. 5th
ROUND: Dec 5 sts evenly spaced. 6th and 7th ROUNDS: 1 sc in each st.
Repeat last 3 rounds 4 times. 20th ROUND: Dec 3 sts evenly spaced. NEXT
2 ROUNDS: Work even in sc. Repeat last 3 rounds twice. NEXT ROUND: Dec 2
sts, cut yarn. TRIM: Cut 160—4 inch strands of White. Take 2 strands;
fold in half, pull folded end through st, pull ends through loop, repeat
in every st of 2nd and 3rd rounds of hat. Open each strand and brush.

CUFFS: Cut 48—4 inch strands of White and complete same as hat trim.

WHISKERS: Wind White 60 times over a 3 inch cardboard. Sew strands tog
at one end; remove from cardboard, cut other end. Open each strand and
brush.

MUSTACHE: Wind White 12 times over a 3 inch cardboard and complete same
as whiskers.

EYEBROWS: (MAKE 2): Wind White 6 times over a 1 inch cardboard and
complete same as whiskers.

HAIR: Wind White 60 times over a 5 inch cardboard. Sew strands tog at
one end, remove from cardboard and cut other end. Open each strand and
brush.

POMPONS: (MAKE 2): Wind White 40 times over a 2½ inch cardboard. Remove
from cardboard, tie in center; cut both ends and trim.

FINISHING: Sew head, arms and feet to body. Sew belt, pompons, whiskers,
hair, mustache and eyebrows in position as illustrated. Sew hat to top
of head. Cut eyes from Black felt and mouth from Red felt. Glue in
position.




                             PENCIL HOLDER


                       ILLUSTRATION ON [PAGE 21]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  1—70 Yd. Skein Wheat
  4 Yds. Dk. Green for leaves
  2 Yds. each of any 2 colors for flowers
  Aluminum Crochet Hook Size H
  1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 8 OR ANY SIZE NEEDLES WHICH WILL RESULT IN
          STITCH GAUGE BELOW
  1 Can (3 inches in diameter)
  GAUGE: 3 sts = 1 inch

UPPER SECTION: Cast on 22 sts. 1st ROW: K 2 tog, K across row inc 1 st
in last st. 2nd ROW: K across row. Repeat 1st 2 rows until section
measures 9 inches from beg. Bind off. LOWER SECTION: Cast on 6 sts. 1st
ROW: K across row. 2nd ROW: Inc 1 st in each st (12 sts). 3rd ROW: K
across row. 4th ROW: K 1, inc in next st, repeat from beg across row.
5th and 6th ROWS: Repeat 3rd and 4th rows (27 sts). 7th ROW: K across
row. 8th ROW: K 2, inc in next st, repeat from beg across row (36 sts).
Bind off.

FINISHING: Sew last row of upper section to cast on sts tog. Sew seam of
lower section. Then sew last row of lower section to one end of upper
section.

TRIM: With Wheat work a row of sc around top working 1 sc in every other
row, join in 1st sc, cut yarn. 2nd ROUND: Attach Dk. Green work 1 sc in
each sc, join in 1st sc, cut yarn.

FLOWERS: Ch 4, dc in 1st st of ch, sl st in same space, * ch 3, 1 dc, sl
st in same space, repeat from * 3 times, cut yarn. Make 1 of each color.

LEAVES: (MAKE 2): With Dk. Green ch 4, leaving last loop of each st on
hook 2 trc in 1st st of ch, yarn over hook and pull through all loops at
one time, cut yarn leaving a length for sewing. Arrange flowers and
leaves on holder as illustrated. Sew in position.




                             KNITTED SHAWL


    [Illustration: Knitted Shawl]

  Materials Required:
  AMERICAN THREAD “AUNT LYDIA’S” HEAVY RUG YARN
  5—70 Yd. Skeins Black
  3—70 Yd. Skeins each Lavender, Lilac and Peacock
  2—70 Yd. Skeins Jade
  1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 10½ OR ANY SIZE NEEDLES WHICH WILL RESULT
          IN MOTIF GAUGE BELOW
  GAUGE: (BLOCKED): 4 sts = 1 inch; 4 rows: 1 inch
  MOTIF: 12 x 12 inches

NOTE: When changing colors leave a 6 inch length for sewing.

MOTIF: MAKE 8: With Lilac cast on 3 sts. Inc 1 st at beg of all rows;
work 6 rows in garter st (K each row), drop Lilac, with Lavender work 6
rows in stockinette st (K 1 row, P 1 row), drop Lavender; with Jade work
4 rows in garter st; then with Peacock work 6 rows in stockinette st;
with Black work 4 rows in garter st; with Lavender work 6 rows in
stockinette st; with Lilac work 8 rows in garter st; with Peacock work 4
rows stockinette st (47 sts). Then dec 1 st at beg of all rows work as
follows: 4 rows stockinette st Peacock; 4 rows garter st Jade; 6 rows
stockinette st Lavender; 2 rows garter st Lilac; 2 rows garter st Black;
2 rows garter st Jade; 6 rows stockinette st Lilac; 4 rows garter st
Peacock; 6 rows stockinette st Black; 8 rows garter st Black. K
remaining 3 sts tog.

FINISHING: Pin and block motifs to 12 x 12 inches. Sew 4 motifs tog
matching colors having Black corners to center. Sew other 4 motifs in
same manner; Sew both sections together.

EDGE: Attach Black in any corner, work a row of sl sts all around
keeping work flat. NEXT 6 ROUNDS: Without joining rounds and working in
back loop of sts only, * 3 sc in corner st, 1 sc in each st to next
corner, repeat from * all around, sl st in last 2 sts of last round to
even round, cut yarn.

    [Illustration: Here are some ideas to start with.
    Be sure to see our complete line of books.]

    [Illustration: american thread
    HIGH RIDGE PARK, STAMFORD, CONN. 06905]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Relocated material “continued on remote page” for more
  conveniently-flowing text.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVELTIES & THINGS: MADE WITH AUNT LYDIA'S HEAVY RUG YARN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


