The Project Gutenberg eBook of Christmas in Sweden; or, A festival of light
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Christmas in Sweden; or, A festival of light

Author: Sarah Gertrude Pomeroy

Illustrator: Bertha Davidson Hoxie

Release date: December 22, 2020 [eBook #64107]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS IN SWEDEN; OR, A FESTIVAL OF LIGHT ***

                            [Illustration]




                               Christmas
                               in Sweden

                                  or

                          A Festival of Light

                            [Illustration]

                                  BY

                        SARAH GERTRUDE POMEROY

                            ILLUSTRATED BY

                            BERTHA D. HOXIE

                            [Illustration]

                                BOSTON
                         DANA ESTES & COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS

                           _Copyright, 1911_

                        BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

                         _All rights reserved_


                          CHRISTMAS IN SWEDEN


                     _Electrotyped and Printed by
                          THE COLONIAL PRESS
                 C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, U.S.A._




                          CHRISTMAS IN SWEDEN

                         THE FESTIVAL OF LIGHT


“A telegram for you, sir.” Elfreda, the pretty Swedish maid, handed the
envelope to Professor Edgecombe as the family were seated at breakfast
one spring morning. Telegrams were not unusual in that household, so
Dorothy and John, the Professor’s children, scarcely heeded the
interruption and were unprepared for the excitement which this
particular bit of yellow paper aroused in their quiet home. When their
father had read the message, he passed it across the table to his wife,
who dropped the sugar-tongs in her eagerness, as soon as she had glanced
at the message.

“Oh, George,” she cried, “it’s too good to be true that you really have
the appointment.”

“What is it?” cried both children in chorus, distracted from their
conversation by the unusual excitement of their little mother.

“It means that we are all going to Sweden to spend father’s sabbatical
year,” replied their mother.

“All of us?” asked Dorothy quickly. She had not welcomed the period of
rest called a sabbatical year which comes to most New England college
professors once in seven years, because she remembered that many of her
playmates had spent the year with relatives while their parents
travelled in Europe, and home-loving little Dorothy dreaded a similar
parting.

“Do you really mean that we are going too?” asked John incredulously.

“That’s exactly what your mother means,” said Professor Edgecombe.
“Mother and I couldn’t go away for a year and leave you children at
home. Besides it is not going to be entirely a year of rest for me, for
this telegram has brought me an appointment to spend the year
translating some stories of the old Norsemen into English. The old
Icelandic document which I am to study is in Sweden and so we can settle
there for the winter.”

[Illustration]

“Hurrah! hurrah!” cried John, entirely forgetful of table manners. “Just
listen, Elfreda, we are all going to Sweden, now what do you think of
that?”

Clash! batter! bang! the serving-tray fell to the floor and pretty,
well-trained Elfreda stood unconscious of disaster, looking from one to
another. “Yes, it’s true, Elfreda,” said Mrs. Edgecombe, “we are going
to spend a year in your beautiful country and will have many questions
to ask you about it.”

By this time the maid had picked up the tray and begun to clear away the
dishes, but tender-hearted little Dorothy noticed that, as she came and
went during the meal, her eyelids were red and her face was
tear-stained.

“What’s the matter, Freda?” she asked kindly, as she ran into the
kitchen after the meal was over, but she stopped short in alarm at the
sight of Freda with her face buried in the roller-towel.

“Leave us alone for a little while, Dorothy,” said Mrs. Edgecombe,
thinking that she knew the cause of the trouble. Poor Freda was
homesick, she thought, and the knowledge that her employers were going
to the dear homeland while she remained in strange America was more than
she could bear.

“Would you really like to go back to Sweden?” inquired Mrs. Edgecombe,
thoughtfully. “We are going to keep house there and I suppose I must
find a maid.” But Freda shook her head while smiles broke through her
tears and she blushed very red. Then she explained that she had promised
to marry Eric, who had been her suitor for some time, but she had
dreaded to “give her notice” to kind Mrs. Edgecombe, who had so
patiently trained her, since she came into her kitchen, a bewildered
little emigrant, two years previous.

“Then it wasn’t all homesickness,” asked Mrs. Edgecombe slyly when she
had congratulated the blushing Freda. But Freda’s eyes filled again.
“No, ma’am, I wouldn’t go back to the old country to stay,” she said,
“but I would like to see my old mother and little brothers and sisters
again.”

“Where do they live, Freda?” inquired Mrs. Edgecombe. “Perhaps we can go
to see them and tell them about your happiness.”

“Oh, could you, ma’am, wouldn’t it be too far?” cried Freda hopefully.

“If your home is near Upsala, I think we can arrange to see your
people,” said Mrs. Edgecombe, “for my husband is going to study some of
the old manuscripts in the University there.” It appeared that she had
lived near the old city and Freda began to plan joyfully about the
presents which she would send to her dear ones.

It seemed to the children as if the weeks would never pass, but, at
length, the great day came when the Edgecombe family stood on the deck
of the big steamship which was to carry them across the ocean. Many of
their friends had come to bid them “Bon Voyage,” so they were surrounded
by a merry party. The warning whistle had just sounded for all visitors
to go ashore and Dorothy was beginning to realize with a queer little
lump in her throat that a year was a long, long time to be parted among
the passengers and saw many amused glances turned from her favorite
cousin, when she noticed a sudden commotion towards their own party.

Her father and mother also turned, attracted by the noise, and the whole
family was amazed at the sight of Freda and Eric, their faces red and
determined as they pushed their way among the passengers, followed by an
angry steward. The officer thought that the young foreigners, coming to
see their friends in the steerage, had mistaken their way; but, although
both Freda and Eric had themselves crossed in the steerage and were a
little awed by the splendors of the first-class part of the ship, they
were determined to get a last glimpse of the Edgecombes.

When Freda had bidden them farewell, a week before, she had told Mrs.
Edgecombe that she should be married within a week, so of course they
were very much surprised to see her there. While Professor Edgecombe was
explaining to the official, Freda told them that she had made Eric take
her to New York on a wedding-trip, especially to see them sail. She had
already entrusted the children with a little box of presents for her
family and now she proudly showed Mrs. Edgecombe a photograph of her
husband and herself, asking her to give it to her old mother with her
own hands. Mrs. Edgecombe promised readily and Freda left the ship
content. The last thing that the children saw, as the dock faded from
view, was Freda, waving her handkerchief in farewell.

Their father left them in Paris, in the late summer, promising that he
would be ready to welcome them when they reached Sweden. First, however,
Mrs. Edgecombe took the children to Germany, so that it was late October
before they boarded a steamer at Lubec, bound for Stockholm.

They would have liked to have stayed for awhile in this beautiful city,
which is sometimes called “The Venice of the North,” but their mother
was anxious to get settled in her Swedish home, so the following
morning, they boarded a train for Upsala.

“Are we really going to keep house just as we do at home?” asked
Dorothy, as the train left the rugged country near Stockholm. “I have
rented an apartment for the winter,” replied their father, smiling, “but
you will find that it is quite different from America in many ways.”

“I didn’t know that they had apartments in Upsala,” said John. “I have
read that the name means ‘The Lofty Halls,’ and that the city is more
old-fashioned than any other place in Sweden.”

“That is true,” said Professor Edgecombe, “but Upsala has some modern
houses, although it is a very ancient city. The great castle on the
hill, which we will visit, the cathedral where we will attend service
and some of the University buildings are grand enough to mean ‘the lofty
halls.’”

“Do the people wear native costume?” asked Mrs. Edgecombe.

“No,” said her husband. “Occasionally, perhaps, you will see a peasant
wearing one of the pretty old-time costumes but, for the most part, even
the peasants as well as the city people wear clothing much like ours.”

“Oh, I’m so sorry,” said Dorothy, for she had pictured to herself little
girls wearing quaint, gaily-colored garments like those that Freda had
described to her.

“Never mind, Dolly,” said her father, pinching her cheek playfully. “You
will find enough that is unusual to satisfy you, I think.”

As the train wound through the beautiful farming-country, they caught
occasional glimpses of beautiful Lake Mälar, and Professor Edgecombe
said that in the spring, they should go to Stockholm by boat and enjoy
the trip on the lake.

“The weather is too cold for us to take that trip, now,” he said, “and
besides we want to get home before dark. You will soon find that the
hours of daylight in Sweden at this time of the year are too precious to
be used carelessly.”

Before the children could ask for an explanation of this speech, the
train had reached Upsala. On the platform stood a gentleman who greeted
their father very cordially. Their father introduced him as Professor
Bjerkander and added that he had been most kind in helping him to
prepare their home in Upsala. He left them at the entrance of their new
home, promising that his wife and children would call that afternoon.

“That is a mark of courtesy, indeed,” said Professor Edgecombe to his
wife, “for in this country it is the custom for strangers to call first
and you see that Fru Bjerkander is going to conform to our usages.”

While he was speaking, he pressed an electric bell beside the pair of
great doors which reminded the children of the entrance to a stable.
When they opened, however, they saw a good-natured portress, who smiled
at them when their father said something to her in Swedish.

They were delighted at the sight of the pleasant rooms opening before
them, when they had climbed the stone stairs to the third floor. It had
seemed impossible that they could ever make a cosy home in a house that
seemed so grim and forbidding. Everything was in order, explained the
smiling little maid in broken English, and they found that her words
were quite true. The table was set for their mid-day meal and, except
for the unpacking of their trunks and the arrangement of their few books
and pictures, the home was ready for them.

“How did you ever do it?” exclaimed Mrs. Edgecombe delightedly to her
husband. That gentleman shook his head. “You will have to thank Fru
Bjerkander,” he said. “She helped me to find Stena, who has done it all
under her direction.”

“Where did you find Stena?” asked his wife, who was pleased with the
neat maid.

“She was waiting for us in the market-place,” replied her husband, and
then explained that he had heard that all servants are engaged in Sweden
during April and October. So he had gone to the market-place with Fru
Bjerkander and had found Stena with many other lads and maids, each
armed with a paper showing that they had their fathers’ written
permission to go out to service.

[Illustration]

Very early in the afternoon, it seemed to the children, Fru Bjerkander
came to call, bringing with her Helmer and Hedwig, her son and daughter,
who were about the age of the Edgecombe children. Much to the relief of
John and Dorothy, they found that their new acquaintances could speak
English almost as well as they could speak their own language, so they
were soon chatting merrily together.

They heard Fru Bjerkander explaining to their mother that she had been
obliged to come early in order to take advantage of the daylight and
this caused Hedwig to say to Dorothy, “It’s too bad that you came to
Sweden when we are having dark nights.” Dorothy looked bewildered, so
Hedwig’s brother hastened to explain: “You know we have most of our
visitors in summer, when the daylight lasts half through the night. I
dare say your father will take you up north to see the midnight sun,
next summer.” “Oh, yes, I see what you mean now by dark nights,” said
John. “You mean they are long ones.”

“Yes, they are indeed,” said the children. “Very soon it will be so dark
at three o’clock in the afternoon that we must have the lights.” “But,
after all,” said Hedwig, “if you had come in the summer time, you
wouldn’t have been here for Jul-tide, and that is the jolliest time of
the whole year. I can hardly wait for the season to come.”

“Father told us we would have the longest Christmas we had ever
celebrated,” said John, “but we didn’t quite know what he meant.” “Oh,”
said Helmer, “you only celebrate one Jul in your country, do you? Our
fun commences on Christmas Eve, and the day after Jul we have what you
would call a second-day Christmas, and then a third-day Christmas. In
fact there is some kind of fun on foot until the thirteenth-day Jul or
sometimes until twentieth-day Jul, which comes the thirteenth day of
January.”

“Oh, my,” cried Dorothy wistfully, “what fun you must have when you live
here and know people.” “You’re going to have it too, this year,” said
sweet little Hedwig, who had caught the longing note in Dorothy’s voice.
“Mother has told us that you are to share all of our Jul-tide frolics.”

“That is quite true,” added Mrs. Bjerkander as she rose to go. “My
children have talked of nothing else but the coming of the young
Americans ever since my husband first met their father. I hope they will
be good friends.”

“We think we are very fortunate to find such friends,” replied Mrs.
Edgecombe, “and now I shall have no fear of the children being lonely.”

They all found the next few days really too short for all they wished to
crowd into them. They visited the library of the University where their
father was working daily and wandered through the strange streets,
watching the throngs of students, who reminded them of the merry college
boys in their own town. “Only our boys would never keep their caps
clean,” declared Dorothy, and their father laughed quite heartily at the
thought as he said, “You’re right, Dolly.” But strange to say, these
lively students always managed to keep the little white velvet caps
trimmed with a rosette of blue and yellow, the national colors,
perfectly clean, and seemed very proud of this mark of distinction which
they wore.

One morning they visited the old castle on the hill, another day they
went to market with their mother and Stena, who was quite bewildered in
her efforts to be a polite servant and at the same time show her new
mistress how to trade in this strange market.

They discovered many odd things about their own new home. All the
windows were covered with double windows and the cracks in the casements
were covered with long strips of white gummed paper, pasted on to keep
out any possible draught.

Mrs. Edgecombe was dismayed, when she found that not one window in the
whole apartment would open wide enough to let in the crisp cold air.

Her feeling of horror was slight, however, compared to Stena’s when she
discovered that the new foreign mistress had torn off the paper and had
a storm window removed from each one of the sleeping-rooms. When she
found that the Americans slept all night with their windows wide open,
the horror of the little maid knew no bounds. She predicted that they
would all die within a month and was so distressed that Mrs. Edgecombe,
who despaired of ever making her understand in the few words of Swedish
and English which each could speak, explained the situation to Fru
Bjerkander and asked her to tell Stena that they always slept with their
windows open at home.

Much to their amusement, however, pretty, cultured Fru Bjerkander seemed
almost as horrified as the little maid. They found, in visiting her
house, that she too had the national hatred of a draught and that all
the windows of her pretty home were tightly sealed.

Since she could not keep the windows closed, Stena seemed resolved to
try and overcome the evil by keeping the rest of the house as warm as
possible. Every morning, when they awoke, they found that the wood fire
in the great porcelain stove in the living-room had been so carefully
tended that there was already a bed of glowing coals in the oven-like
opening at the base. The children liked to hurry out from their frosty
bedrooms and finish dressing by the great white stove, while the rosy
glow from the fire seemed very cheerful on those dark mornings when they
had to breakfast by lamplight.

Mrs. Edgecombe had feared that so much darkness would be depressing and,
as the days grew shorter until, at length, it was necessary to light the
lamps before three o’clock in the afternoon, she wondered if the
children would not get homesick.

But they were too much interested in the new sights and experiences to
get lonely. Indeed, it seemed to them that the long, long evenings were
not half long enough for the work they had to do. They were both busily
engaged in finishing Christmas presents for the dear ones at home, for
they realized that it would take many days for their packages to travel
to America.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the days grew shorter and shorter and the nights grew longer and
longer as the month of December advanced and all Upsala was filled with
preparations for the joyous Jul-tide. The Edgecombe household was no
exception for Stena had insisted that the apartment must be thoroughly
cleaned before the great festival.

Mrs. Edgecombe could not quite see the necessity for such wholesale
cleaning, since they had lived there less than six weeks and Stena was
always polishing and scouring. But the little maid was so distressed at
the thought of not cleaning that Mrs. Edgecombe let her have her way and
the rooms were turned topsy-turvy while Stena swept, dusted and beat
furniture to her heart’s content.

Professor Edgecombe declared that it was worse than spring
house-cleaning in America, for every house he passed in his daily walk
to and from the University showed signs of the same upheaval.

One morning, Stena told Mrs. Edgecombe that she was ready for the
chimney-sweep and if Mrs. Edgecombe were willing, she had a little
cousin who was making his living in that way and whom she would like to
employ. Mrs. Edgecombe had expected this request, for she had heard that
another strict precaution against fire in all Swedish cities was the law
requiring that all chimneys should be swept clean very frequently.

John had been much interested in the small, sooty-faced little lads whom
he had occasionally seen running about the streets with their brooms in
their hands. He had much wanted to make the acquaintance of one and now
thought that he knew enough Swedish to ask him a few questions.

But Stena was quite astonished when her mistress told her to show the
little lad into the living-room, after his work was done. She shook her
head determinedly. “Too dirty, too dirty,” she repeated with emphasis.

“Well,” laughed his mother, “if you want to talk with him, John, I think
you’ll have to go into the kitchen and see him there, when he has
finished. Stena is quite right and I do not know as I blame her for not
wanting him in her clean room. Tell her to let us know when he is
ready.”

As the kitchen door closed behind Stena, Mrs. Edgecombe reminded them
that there was still one box which had not been unpacked.

“I have neglected to do so because I think that it contains only some of
our heaviest winter clothing,” she said. “But it has been so long since
we packed it that I have almost forgotten what is in it. Suppose we open
it, now.”

John pried up the cover and Mrs. Edgecombe tore off the papers which
covered the top. As she did so, Dorothy uttered an exclamation.

“Freda’s box,” she cried, “Freda’s box!”

Sure enough, there was the package of toys and trinkets which Freda had
selected with such loving care in the American stores and entrusted to
them to give to her dear ones.

“We must find the family and give these to them, at once,” said Mrs.
Edgecombe, but she looked puzzled when John inquired, “What’s the name
and address?”

“Perhaps it’s in the box,” suggested Dorothy. “All I remember is Freda’s
telling us that her home was just outside of Upsala.” But a careful
search of the box revealed no address. The little presents were
carefully marked for each member of the family but there was no surname
on any one of them and nothing which gave them a clue of the name of the
place where

[Illustration]

Freda had passed her girlhood and where she had told them a feeble old
mother and several younger brothers and sisters were still living.

“I have an idea,” said John. “Where’s her picture, Mother? Perhaps she
wrote it on the back of that.”

Mrs. Edgecombe ran to her desk and began searching through her papers.
At length she drew out the photograph of Freda, looking very happy in
her wedding dress while Eric stood by seeming decidedly stiff and
uncomfortable in his best clothes. But, alas! secure in the pride of her
new name, Freda, the bride, had written very plainly “Mrs. Eric Svenson”
on the back of the photograph, and the only address was the street and
number of the little house in America where she and Eric had founded
their new home.

“Well,” said Mrs. Edgecombe, brightening, “at any rate, we can write to
her and tell her what we need. There will be plenty of time to hear from
her before we leave Sweden.”

“I suppose it is all we can do,” said John.

“But it’s too bad,” cried Dorothy. “She talked so much of the Jul-tide,
and I know that she intended these things for Christmas presents.”

“It is too bad,” said Mrs. Edgecombe. She stood the photograph on the
table and her eyes filled with tears as she looked at Freda’s honest,
happy face. Freda had been a faithful maid and Mrs. Edgecombe could not
forget how faithful she had been to her in a time of illness and sorrow.

There was a slight sound behind them and Mrs. Edgecombe turned to see
Stena standing in a funny attitude, as if she had suddenly become frozen
in the very act of making a courtesy. The short winter day had already
darkened so that the lamps had been lighted and Mrs. Edgecombe had
placed the photograph beneath the lamp where the strong light fell
directly upon it.

Before the astonished trio could utter a word, Stena had given a little
gasp and, for once forgetful of manners, had made a wild dash into the
kitchen and returned in a moment, dragging a very dirty and very much
surprised little chimney-sweep behind her. Before he could show any
shyness at his strange surroundings, she had pushed him close to the
photograph and pointed at the pictured faces with her forefinger.

Then the little sweep did a strange thing, for, heedless of his sooty
fingers, he grasped the photograph in both his dirty hands while tears
ran from his bright eyes, making white furrows down his black cheeks.
Stena, too, careless of her clean room, caught him by the hands and they
danced together in their excitement.

[Illustration]

“What does this mean?” It was Professor Edgecombe who asked the question
as he came in from the hall. “Perhaps you know enough Swedish to find
out,” replied his wife. “We don’t.”

In a few minutes, however, they had discovered that Stena was own cousin
to their Freda and that she had recognized her photograph instantly. Her
first thought had been to show it to the little chimney-sweep, for he
was Freda’s little brother, only a little chap when she had left home,
but now big enough to add his share to the family income.

The family had never allowed him to forget Freda and his greatest
ambition was to earn money enough to pay his passage to America, when he
should be old enough to go and join his big sister.

He hated to give up the photograph and loosened his hold reluctantly
when Stena, at last, made him understand that the American lady had
promised Freda to give it to his mother with her own hands and he must
wait until she found a time to do so.

“But when can I? Where do they live?” asked Mrs. Edgecombe.

Stena replied that her aunt and cousins lived on a tiny farm about ten
miles out of the city. “Could we drive there?” asked Mrs. Edgecombe of
her husband. But Dorothy cried out, before he could answer.

“Oh, Mother, I’ve such a beautiful plan. You know the Bjerkanders have
asked us to spend Christmas Eve and Christmas day with them, so that we
cannot possibly have a tree of our own. But Helmer says that they keep
the tree for many days and that often, on New Year’s day, they light it
up again and have a party for some poor children.

“Can’t we do that here? Oh, do say we may! I do so want to decorate a
Christmas tree.”

Dorothy stopped, quite out of breath, and Professor Edgecombe looked at
their mother, questioningly.

“I think it is a splendid plan,” she said, “much better than any I could
have suggested.”

So Professor Edgecombe explained to Stena that she was to write and
explain matters to her aunt and tell her that he would send a sleigh to
bring the family to a Jul-tide party on New Year’s day, when they would
tell them all about Freda.

Stena’s face was wreathed with smiles and the eyes of the little
chimney-sweep fairly stuck out of his head, as he bowed his thanks for
the bright new coin which Professor Edgecombe gave him to pay for his
work.

And now the days were busy ones indeed. On the twentieth of December,
the old market-place in Upsala was an interesting

[Illustration]

place, for there the peasants from the country were erecting little
booths, each roofed over with cotton drilling and lighted with lamps and
lanterns. Here were sold many trinkets which the peasants had made in
anticipation of the holiday season.

Fru Bjerkander invited the Edgecombes to accompany her, when she took
her own children to visit the market. She explained that this special
market was a very ancient one and that the peasants, according to an old
custom, were permitted annually to sell their wares in this way from the
twentieth of December, until the end of the month.

The American children were especially delighted with the gingerbread
booth where they bought quantities of the Julbocken (Yule-goats) and
Julgrisen (Yule-pig). It was true that these gingerbread animals
sometimes resembled each other in such a surprising way that it was hard
to distinguish the pigs from the goats, but, in spite of that, Dorothy
wanted to buy some to send to America. John told her that they would
probably dry up and break into pieces, long before they reached there,
so she had to content herself with buying some for the New Year’s
Christmas tree, as she called it.

“You can hang them on the branches, you know, and then give them to
Freda’s little brothers and sisters to eat afterwards,” said Hedwig.
“That is the way we always do.”

“But why do they have goats and pigs at Jul-tide?” asked John. “Why,
don’t you know?” replied Helmer, in surprise. “It is to remind us of
Thor’s goats and Frey’s pig, which were sacred to our forefathers.”

“Why were they sacred?” asked Dorothy. “Why, the goats drew the giant
chariot of Thor, the Thunderer, through the skies,” said Hedwig.

“The Yule-pig makes us think of Frey’s hog,” said Helmer. “It was a
magical hog whose golden bristles illuminated the darkest night and it
could run more swiftly than any horse on land or sea.”

The American children looked rather bewildered and Dorothy asked why
these animals should be especially remembered at Christmas-time.

Helmer and Hedwig laughed outright at this question, for it seemed
really funny to them that any one could be so ignorant of the old
stories which they had known from their nursery days, but Fru Bjerkander
said kindly, “You must ask your father to tell you something about the
ancient gods and their stories, for he is reading about them, every day,
in the Edda.”

[Illustration]

So that evening, the children drew their chairs in front of the great
white stove which seemed to be the very heart of their home these cold
winter evenings and clamored for the stories.

“Do you remember,” said their father, “what I told you before we left
America, that the favorite festival among the heathen people in this
part of the world, before Christ was born, came at just this time of the
year?”

“Yes, we remember,” cried both children. “Well,” said their father, “I
will tell you why they celebrated at this particular season:

“The ancient inhabitants of Sweden believed that there were many gods,
but chief among them they worshipped Odin, the All-Father, Thor, the
Thunderer, and Freya, the Sun-god. Odin was the god of war and was
served by faithful maid-servants called the Valkyries, whose duty it was
to bear the heroes slain upon the battle-field to Valhal, a beautiful
region of peace. Thor wielded the thunders and lightnings, as his name
implies, but Freya was the most popular of all, for upon his favor
depended good harvest, fruitfulness and consequently pleasure. The
people celebrated his birthday at the time of the winter solstice, for
then the days began to lengthen and it seemed the appropriate time for
the birthday of a Sun-god. For twelve days and nights they continued
their feasting, but there was one night during the festival which was
not joyful, for then the people remembered the anniversary of a great
sorrow.”

“Oh, what was it?” cried Dorothy, and “Please go on,” said John as their
father stopped for breath. Professor Edgecombe smiled at their interest,
as he continued.

“Balder the Beautiful was beloved by gods and men because he represented
goodness and made everything bright and cheerful. Some scholars connect
him with Freya and say that he represented the bright summer sun. I said
that everybody loved him, but that was not quite true, for he had one
enemy, and, as you might imagine, that was Loki, the god of evil. One
night Balder dreamed that he was to die, and when he told his dream to
his mother, Frigg, she was so distressed that she made all things
animate and inanimate swear that they would not injure her son. From
that time on, it was the favorite pastime of the gods to throw stones
and other missiles at Balder, because he seemed invulnerable and none of
these things could injure him.

“But wicked old Loki knew that there was one little plant which Frigg
had overlooked when she was exacting her oath and so he plotted to kill
Balder. He gathered some of the mistletoe berries, that seemed too small
and insignificant to do any harm, and gave them to Höor, the blind
brother of Balder, who could not share in the fun on account of his
infirmity. ‘Come,’ said Loki, ‘do like the rest; show honor to Balder by
casting this trifle at him and I will direct your hand.’ Höor did as he
was bidden and Balder fell dead, pierced through by the mistletoe.

“Now it happened that the death night of Balder fell on one of the
longest nights in the year and the people believed that the darkness
came because the God of Light was dead. So, on that night, they made
great sacrifices and offered up prayers that they might not lose the
light. Especially if the harvests had failed or the huntsmen had been
unfortunate in the season just past did they offer sacrifices to Thor
beneath an oak which was sacred to the Thunderer. For they thought that
he was particularly angry at the people because he was so grieved at the
death of Balder the Beautiful.

“Then, as the days began to grow longer and the nights to grow shorter
from that very date, the people thought that their prayers had been
answered and so, every year, on the anniversary of his death, they
repeated the ceremony and the light never failed them.

“Of course we understand that the sun has reached his southern limit at
this time of the year and is returning on his northward journey, but the
old idea of making Jul-tide the Festival of Light still prevails among
the Swedes, who know that now the worst of the darkness is over and that
slowly but surely the sun is coming back to them.”

“Well told,” exclaimed Professor Bjerkander, who had entered in the
midst of the story. “My wife has mentioned the children’s interest and I
have come to see how you would like to take a sleigh-ride out to the
burial-place of the old gods, on Christmas day.” The children declared
that they should like it above all things and so the invitation was
accepted.

“You must come early to our house, on the morning of December 24th, if
you want to join in one of our national customs,” said Fru Bjerkander,
when Christmas week had at last arrived. “To-morrow we celebrate
‘dipping day.’”

“What does she mean by that?” asked Dorothy of her mother. “We will have
to go and find out, dear,” said her mother, “for I have no more idea
what she means than you have.”

When the Edgecombe family arrived at the home of their friends the next
morning, they were ushered into the dining-room, for the living-room was
locked and darkened. They all thought it very odd that there were no
signs of any preparations for a meal for it was almost noon. Just at
twelve, however, Fru Bjerkander invited them into the kitchen, where
they were soon seated about a well-spread table. Their hostess then
explained in English that it was an old custom all over Sweden for
employers and servants to dine together on the day before Christmas, and
rich and poor alike ate this meal in the kitchen. “I still fail to
understand why you should call it ‘dipping-day,’” said Professor
Edgecombe.

“I will show you,” said Fru Bjerkander, rising. She took from the stove
the kettle in which the ham and pork, the chief dishes of the dinner,
had been cooked. As she passed it to each one, everybody dipped a bit of
bread in the sizzling fat in which the meat had been cooked and ate it
with much glee. “On this day we must all doppai grytan,” she said, and
Hedwig translated the expression for them by saying “That means that we
must all dip in the kettle.”

“But why do you do this?” asked Professor Edgecombe. “I do not know,”
replied Professor Bjerkander, “unless it is because we always have ham
and pork at Jul-tide in remembrance of the Jul-boar, which was always
roasted whole at the heathen festival.”

The short afternoon was soon over and, a few hours later, the children
were admitted to the living-room, where the beautiful spruce tree stood
in all its glory. The Edgecombes had seen many Christmas trees, but it
seemed to them that none had ever seemed so beautiful as this one with
its brilliant lights and graceful trimmings.

The children joined hands about it and danced through the rooms and
around and around the tree, until they were out of breath. Then the
presents were distributed from the tables which stood piled high with
gifts beneath the tree, and the Americans were surprised to find so many
bearing their own names. Each gift was sealed and tied daintily, while
all were accompanied by some appropriate little verse, for the Swedes
think that no gift is quite complete unless there is a little poem with
it.

When, at length, the Edgecombe family went home, they met parties of
merry masqueraders who were joking together and having the best of times
as they delivered packages from house to house. They understood that
these were the servants, who were allowed to amuse themselves in this
way while they did their duty of delivering their master’s gifts.

Very early the next morning, they all started for the old cathedral to
attend matins, the early service which good Lutherans always attend on
Christmas morning. The streets were still dark and the lights of the
cathedral shone out brightly as they approached the great open doorways.
But, in spite of this, they were quite unprepared for the burst of
brilliancy which met their gaze when they entered the church. Everywhere
they gazed was a light, and the children said that now they understood
why so many of their Swedish friends still referred to Jul-tide by its
old-fashioned name of the Festival of Light.

Before the morning was far advanced, the Bjerkanders had called for them
and they were all snugly packed into the great roomy sleigh drawn by
prancing horses which were covered with white nets and decorated with
nodding plumes. It seemed to the children that even the horses acted as
if they knew it was holiday time, for they danced along so gaily.

The three miles were quickly covered and they came to the place where
stand the three great mounds which the Swedes say mark the graves of
Odin, Thor and Freya, the great gods of their forefathers.

“Were they really buried here?” asked Dorothy in awe.

“Probably not,” said her father; “it is generally supposed that the
mounds really mark the graves of ancient kings.”

Then Professor Bjerkander took them to the little Christian church that
stands on the site of the old heathen temple and the children tried to
imagine the great halls glittering with gold and silver and filled with
people offering sacrifices to Thor the Terrible, while they mourned for
Balder the Beautiful.

So they drove back into the city, their minds full of the Norse gods
while their hearts were thankful that the days of that

[Illustration]

wild religion were over and that the birthday of the Prince of Peace was
the day they were celebrating.

For dinner, they had the three chief dainties of the season, lusk-fish
which had been prepared by heating for several days in wood-ashes, rice
sweetened and flavored with cinnamon, and roast goose. The children
missed the roast turkey and cranberry sauce which their own Grandma
always cooked but they were hungry and did ample justice to their
Swedish dinner.

Second-day Christmas and third-day Christmas passed all too quickly and
the Edgecombe children had almost as good a time as on the great day
itself. For now their friends, like themselves, were free to skate and
ski and enjoy all the winter sports of that northern land. Amidst all
their pleasures, they prepared for their party, which was to be the
crowning feature of the week. A beautiful spruce tree was decorated for
the occasion and Mrs. Edgecombe bought plenty of Julbocken and Julgrisen
to trim it, with other dainties peculiar to the season. To Freda’s
little store of gifts she added others of her own selection, and invited
the Bjerkander children to help entertain the guests, for she thought
that she might have to call upon them to help her deliver Freda’s
messages. And so it proved, for when they came, they could only smile
and courtesy to Freda’s mistress. Stena had to talk for them, but her
English was limited, and so the Bjerkander children acted as
interpreters.

The guests seemed very grateful for their gifts and delighted with the
tree, but nothing pleased them as Freda’s own presents, and it seemed as
if they would wear the photograph out, as they passed it from one to the
other, admiring it and chatting about “Freda’s man.” When they went
home, Freda’s mother thanked Mrs. Edgecombe for her kindness with tears
in her eyes and an expression of gratitude on her face which needed no
translation into English. They asked the Americans to come and see them
and Professor Edgecombe promised that, when the summer days came, before
they returned home, they would drive out and visit the little red
cottage which had been Freda’s girlhood home.

So they went away happily and the Edgecombe family, having bidden
farewell to their other guests, gathered to talk it over in the light of
the glowing fire.

“To-morrow, we must all take time to write to the homefolks about our
Christmas in Sweden and we mustn’t forget to tell every detail of the
novel experiences we have enjoyed,” said their mother. “Perhaps we will
each take some particular part of the celebration to describe and then
no one of us will have to write too much.”

“I want to tell about ‘Dipping Day,’” said Professor Edgecombe. “I
choose to write about the Julbocken and the Julgrisen,” said Dorothy.
“Then you had better write all about Freda’s family and our New Year’s
party,” said John to his mother, “for I would like to write out the
story of Balder the Beautiful. I think writing it out would help me to
remember it and I don’t want to forget it.”

[Illustration]

“I am quite satisfied with my part of the letter-writing,” said his
mother, “for entertaining Freda’s family was the happiest part of the
week for me. How glad they will all be to get the letter,” she added
softly.

So with tender thoughts of the friends at home, they all sat quiet for
awhile, gazing into the depths of their golden fire and thinking that
the Swedish Festival of Light had indeed been the merriest Yule-tide of
their lives.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS IN SWEDEN; OR, A FESTIVAL OF LIGHT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


