The Project Gutenberg eBook of What Became of the Slaves on a Georgia Plantation?
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: What Became of the Slaves on a Georgia Plantation?

Author: Q. K. Philander Doesticks

Release date: March 13, 2021 [eBook #64804]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Tim Lindell, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT BECAME OF THE SLAVES ON A GEORGIA PLANTATION? ***

+-------------------------------------------------+
|Transcriber's note:                              |
|                                                 |
|Obvious typographic errors have been corrected.  |
|                                                 |
+-------------------------------------------------+




WHAT BECAME OF THE SLAVES

ON A

GEORGIA PLANTATION?


GREAT

AUCTION SALE OF SLAVES,

AT

SAVANNAH, GEORGIA,

MARCH 2d & 3d, 1859.

A SEQUEL TO MRS. KEMBLE'S JOURNAL.


1863.




SALE OF SLAVES.


The largest sale of human chattels that has been made in Star-Spangled
America for several years, took place on Wednesday and Thursday of
last week, at the Race-course near the City of Savannah, Georgia. The
lot consisted of four hundred and thirty-six men, women, children
and infants, being that half of the negro stock remaining on the old
Major Butler plantations which fell to one of the two heirs to that
estate. Major Butler, dying, left a property valued at more than a
million of dollars, the major part of which was invested in rice and
cotton plantations, and the slaves thereon, all of which immense
fortune descended to two heirs, his sons, Mr. John A. Butler, sometime
deceased, and Mr. Pierce M. Butler, still living, and resident in the
City of Philadelphia, in the free State of Pennsylvania. Losses in the
great crash of 1857-8, and other exigencies of business, have compelled
the latter gentleman to realize on his Southern investments, that he
may satisfy his pressing creditors. This necessity led to a partition
of the negro stock on the Georgia plantations, between himself and
the representative of the other heir, the widow of the late John A.
Butler, and the negroes that were brought to the hammer last week
were the property of Mr. Pierce M. Butler, of Philadelphia, and were
in fact sold to pay Mr. Pierce M. Butler's debts. The creditors were
represented by Gen. Cadwalader, while Mr. Butler was present in person,
attended by his business agent, to attend to his own interests.

The sale had been advertised largely for many weeks, though the name
of Mr. Butler was not mentioned; and as the negroes were known to be
a choice lot and very desirable property, the attendance of buyers
was large. The breaking up of an old family estate is so uncommon
an occurrence that the affair was regarded with unusual interest
throughout the South. For several days before the sale every hotel
in Savannah was crowded with negro speculators from North and South
Carolina, Virginia, Georgia, Alabama, and Louisiana, who had been
attracted hither by the prospects of making good bargains. Nothing
was heard for days, in the barrooms and public rooms, but talk of
the great sale; criticisms of the business affairs of Mr. Butler,
and speculations as to the probable prices the stock would bring.
The office of Joseph Bryan, the Negro Broker, who had the management
of the sale, was thronged every day by eager inquirers in search of
information, and by some who were anxious to buy, but were uncertain as
to whether their securities would prove acceptable. Little parties were
made up from the various hotels every day to visit the Race-course,
distant some three miles from the city, to look over the chattels,
discuss their points, and make memoranda for guidance on the day of
sale. The buyers were generally of a rough breed, slangy, profane
and bearish, being for the most part from the back river and swamp
plantations, where the elegancies of polite life are not, perhaps,
developed to their fullest extent. In fact, the humanities are sadly
neglected by the petty tyrants of the rice-fields that border the great
Dismal Swamp, their knowledge of the luxuries of our best society
comprehending only revolvers and kindred delicacies.

Your correspondent was present at an early date; but as he easily
anticipated the touching welcome that would, at such a time, be
officiously extended to a representative of _The Tribune_, and being
a modest man withal, and not desiring to be the recipient of a public
demonstration from the enthusiastic Southern population, who at times
overdo their hospitality and their guests, he did not placard his
mission and claim his honors. Although he kept his business in the
back-ground, he made himself a prominent figure in the picture, and,
wherever there was anything going on, there was he in the midst. At
the sale might have been seen a busy individual, armed with pencil and
catalogue, doing his little utmost to keep up all the appearance of a
knowing buyer, pricing "likely nigger fellers," talking confidentially
to the smartest ebon maids, chucking the round-eyed youngsters under
the chin, making an occasional bid for a large family, (a low bid--so
low that somebody always instantly raised him twenty-five dollars, when
the busy man would ignominiously retreat,) and otherwise conducting
himself like a rich planter, with forty thousand dollars where he could
put his finger on it. This gentleman was much condoled with by some
sympathizing persons, when the particularly fine lot on which he had
fixed his eye was sold and lost to him forever, because he happened to
be down stairs at lunch just at the interesting moment.


WHERE THE NEGROES CAME FROM.

The negroes came from two plantations, the one a rice plantation near
Darien, in the State of Georgia, not far from the great Okefenokee
Swamp, and the other a cotton plantation on the extreme northern point
of St. Simon's Island, a little bit of an island in the Atlantic,
cut off from Georgia mainland by a slender arm of the sea. Though
the most of the stock had been accustomed only to rice and cotton
planting, there were among them a number of very passable mechanics,
who had been taught to do all the rougher sorts of mechanical work
on the plantations. There were coopers, carpenters, shoemakers
and blacksmiths, each one equal, in his various craft, to the
ordinary requirements of a plantation; thus, the coopers could make
rice-tierces, and possibly, on a pinch, rude tubs and buckets; the
carpenter could do the rough carpentry about the negro-quarters; the
shoemaker could make shoes of the fashion required for the slaves, and
the blacksmith was adequate to the manufacture of hoes and similar
simple tools, and to such trifling repairs in the blacksmithing way
as did not require too refined a skill. Though probably no one of all
these would be called a superior, or even an average workman, among
the masters of the craft, their knowledge of these various trades sold
in some cases for nearly as much as the man--that is, a man without
a trade, who would be valued at $900, would readily bring $1,600 or
$1,700 if he was a passable blacksmith or cooper.

There were no light mulattoes in the whole lot of the Butler stock,
and but very few that were even a shade removed from the original
Congo blackness. They have been little defiled by the admixture of
degenerate Anglo-Saxon blood, and, for the most part, could boast that
they were of as pure a breed as the best blood of Spain--a point in
their favor in the eyes of the buyer as well as physiologically, for
too liberal an infusion of the blood of the dominant race brings a
larger intelligence, a more vigorous brain, which, anon, grows restless
under the yoke, and is prone to inquire into the definition of the word
Liberty, and the meaning of the starry flag which waves, as you may
have heard, o'er the land of the free. The pure-blooded negroes are
much more docile and manageable than mulattoes, though less quick of
comprehension, which makes them preferred by drivers, who can stimulate
stupidity much easier than they can control intelligence by the lash.

None of the Butler slaves have ever been sold before, but have been
on these two plantations since they were born. Here have they lived
their humble lives, and loved their simple loves; here were they born,
and here have many of them had children born unto them; here had their
parents lived before them, and are now resting in quiet graves on the
old plantations that these unhappy ones are to see no more forever;
here they left not only the well-known scenes dear to them from very
baby-hood by a thousand fond memories, and homes as much loved by
them, perhaps, as brighter homes by men of brighter faces; but all
the clinging ties that bound them to living hearts were torn asunder,
for but one-half of each of these two happy little communities was
sent to the shambles, to be scattered to the four winds, and the other
half was left behind. And who can tell how closely intertwined are the
affections of a little band of four hundred persons, living isolated
from all the world beside, from birth to middle age? Do they not
naturally become one great family, each man a brother unto each?

It is true they were sold "in families;" but let us see: a man and his
wife were called a "family," their parents and kindred were not taken
into account; the man and wife might be sold to the pine woods of North
Carolina, their brothers and sisters be scattered through the cotton
fields of Alabama and the rice swamps of Louisiana, while the parents
might be left on the old plantation to wear out their weary lives in
heavy grief, and lay their heads in far-off graves, over which their
children might never weep. And no account could be taken of loves
that were as yet unconsummated by marriage; and how many aching hearts
have been divorced by this summary proceeding no man can ever know.
And the separation is as utter, and is infinitely more hopeless, than
that made by the Angel of Death, for then the loved ones are committed
to the care of a merciful Deity; but in the other instance, to the
tender mercies of a slave-driver. These dark-skinned unfortunates are
perfectly unlettered, and could not communicate by writing even if they
should know where to send their missives. And so to each other, and
to the old familiar places of their youth, clung all their sympathies
and affections, not less strong, perhaps, because they are so few. The
blades of grass on all the Butler estates are outnumbered by the tears
that are poured out in agony at the wreck that has been wrought in
happy homes, and the crushing grief that has been laid on loving hearts.

But, then, what business have "niggers" with tears? Besides, didn't
Pierce Butler give them a silver dollar a-piece? which will appear
in the sequel. And, sad as it is, it was all necessary, because a
gentleman was not able to live on the beggarly pittance of half a
million, and so must needs enter into speculations which turned out
adversely.


HOW THEY WERE TREATED IN SAVANNAH.

The negroes were brought to Savannah in small lots, as many at a time
as could be conveniently taken care of, the last of them reaching the
city the Friday before the sale. They were consigned to the care of Mr.
J. Bryan, Auctioneer and Negro Broker, who was to feed and keep them
in condition until disposed of. Immediately on their arrival they were
taken to the Race-course, and there quartered in the sheds erected for
the accommodation of the horses and carriages of gentlemen attending
the races. Into these sheds they were huddled pell-mell, without any
more attention to their comfort than was necessary to prevent their
becoming ill and unsaleable. Each "family" had one or more boxes or
bundles, in which were stowed such scanty articles of their clothing as
were not brought into immediate requisition, and their tin dishes and
gourds for their food and drink.

It is, perhaps, a fit tribute to large-handed munificence to say that,
when the negro man was sold, there was no extra charge for the negro
man's clothes; they went with the man, and were not charged in the
bill. Nor is this altogether a contemptible idea, for many of them
had worldly wealth, in the shape of clothing and other valuables, to
the extent of perhaps four or five dollars; and had all these been
taken strictly into the account, the sum total of the sale would have
been increased, possibly, a thousand dollars. In the North, we do not
necessarily sell the harness with the horse; why, in the South, should
the clothes go with the negro?

In these sheds were the chattels huddled together on the floor, there
being no sign of bench or table. They eat and slept on the bare boards,
their food being rice and beans, with occasionally a bit of bacon and
corn bread. Their huge bundles were scattered over the floor, and
thereon the slaves sat or reclined, when not restlessly moving about,
or gathered into sorrowful groups, discussing the chances of their
future fate. On the faces of all was an expression of heavy grief;
some appeared to be resigned to the hard stroke of Fortune that had
torn them from their homes, and were sadly trying to make the best
of it; some sat brooding moodily over their sorrows, their chins
resting on their hands, their eyes staring vacantly, and their bodies
rocking to and fro, with a restless motion that was never stilled;
few wept, the place was too public and the drivers too near, though
some occasionally turned aside to give way to a few quiet tears.
They were dressed in every possible variety of uncouth and fantastic
garb, in every style and of every imaginable color; the texture of
the garments was in all cases coarse, most of the men being clothed
in the rough cloth that is made expressly for the slaves. The dresses
assumed by the negro minstrels, when they give imitations of plantation
character, are by no means exaggerated; they are, instead, weak and
unable to come up to the original. There was every variety of hats,
with every imaginable slouch; and there was every cut and style of
coat and pantaloons, made with every conceivable ingenuity of misfit,
and tossed on with a general appearance of perfect looseness that is
perfectly indescribable, except to say that a Southern negro always
looks as if he could shake his clothes off without taking his hands out
of his pockets. The women, true to the feminine instinct, had made, in
almost every case, some attempt at finery. All wore gorgeous turbans,
generally manufactured in an instant out of a gay-colored handkerchief
by a sudden and graceful twist of the fingers; though there was
occasionally a more elaborate turban, a turban complex and mysterious,
got up with care, and ornamented with a few beads or bright bits of
ribbon. Their dresses were mostly coarse stuff, though there were some
gaudy calicoes; a few had ear-rings, and one possessed the treasure
of a string of yellow and blue beads. The little children were always
better and more carefully dressed than the older ones, the parental
pride coming out in the shape of a yellow cap pointed like a mitre, or
a jacket with a strip of red broadcloth round the bottom. The children
were of all sizes, the youngest being fifteen days old. The babies
were generally good-natured; though when one would set up a yell, the
complaint soon attacked the others, and a full chorus would be the
result.

The slaves remained at the Race-course, some of them for more than a
week, and all of them for four days before the sale. They were brought
in thus early that buyers who desired to inspect them might enjoy that
privilege, although none of them were sold at private sale. For these
preliminary days their shed was constantly visited by speculators.
The negroes were examined with as little consideration as if they had
been brutes indeed; the buyers pulling their mouths open to see their
teeth, pinching their limbs to find how muscular they were, walking
them up and down to detect any signs of lameness, making them stoop
and bend in different ways that they might be certain there was no
concealed rupture or wound; and in addition to all this treatment,
asking them scores of questions relative to their qualifications and
accomplishments. All these humiliations were submitted to without a
murmur, and in some instances with good-natured cheerfulness--where the
slave liked the appearance of the proposed buyer, and fancied that he
might prove a kind "Mas'r."

The following curiously sad scene is the type of a score of others that
were there enacted:

"Elisha," chattel No. 5 in the catalogue, had taken a fancy to a
benevolent-looking middle-aged gentleman, who was inspecting the stock,
and thus used his powers of persuasion to induce the benevolent man to
purchase him, with his wife, boy and girl, Molly, Israel and Sevanda,
chattels Nos. 6, 7 and 8. The earnestness with which the poor fellow
pressed his suit, knowing, as he did, that perhaps the happiness of his
whole life depended on his success, was touching, and the arguments he
used most pathetic. He made no appeal to the feelings of the buyer; he
rested no hope on his charity and kindness, but only strove to show how
well worth his dollars were the bone and blood he was entreating him to
buy.

"Look at me, Mas'r; am prime rice planter; sho' you won't find a better
man den me; no better on de whole plantation; not a bit old yet; do mo'
work den ever; do carpenter work, too, little; better buy me, Mas'r;
I'se be good sarvant, Mas'r. Molly, too, my wife, Sa, fus'rate rice
hand; mos as good as me. Stan' out yer, Molly, and let the gen'lm'n
see."

Molly advances, with her hands crossed on her bosom, and makes a quick
short curtsy, and stands mute, looking appealingly in the benevolent
man's face. But Elisha talks all the faster.

"Show mas'r yer arm, Molly--good arm dat, Mas'r--she do a heap of work
mo' with dat arm yet. Let good Mas'r see yer teeth, Molly--see dat
Mas'r, teeth all reg'lar, all good--she'm young gal yet. Come out yer,
Israel, walk aroun' an' let the gen'lm'n see how spry you be"--

Then, pointing to the three-year-old girl who stood with her chubby
hand to her mouth, holding on to her mother's dress, and uncertain what
to make of the strange scene.

"Little Vardy's only a chile yet; make prime gal by-and-by. Better
buy us, Mas'r, we'm fus' rate bargain"--and so on. But the benevolent
gentleman found where he could drive a closer bargain, and so bought
somebody else.

Similar scenes were transacting all the while on every side--parents
praising the strength and cleverness of their children, and showing
off every muscle and sinew to the very best advantage, not with the
excusable pride of other parents, but to make them the more desirable
in the eyes of the man-buyer; and, on the other hand, children
excusing and mitigating the age and inability of parents, that they
might be more marketable and fall, if possible, into kind hands. Not
unfrequently these representations, if borne out by the facts, secured
a purchaser. The women never spoke to the white men unless spoken to,
and then made the conference as short as possible. And not one of them
all, during the whole time they were thus exposed to the rude questions
of vulgar men, spoke the first unwomanly or indelicate word, or
conducted herself in any regard otherwise than as a modest woman should
do; their conversation and demeanor were quite as unexceptionable as
they would have been had they been the highest ladies in the land, and
through all the insults to which they were subjected they conducted
themselves with the most perfect decorum and self-respect.

The sentiment of the subjoined characteristic dialogue was heard more
than once repeated:

"Well, Colonel, I seen you looking sharp at Shoemaker Bill's Sally.
Going to buy her?

"Well, Major, I think not. Sally's a good, big, strapping gal, and can
do a heap o' work; but it's five years since she had any children.
_She's done breeding, I reckon._"

In the intervals of more active labor, the discussion of the reopening
of the slave trade was commenced, and the opinion seemed to generally
prevail that its re√É¬ęstablishment is a consummation devoutly to be
wished, and one red-faced Major or General or Corporal clenched his
remarks with the emphatic assertion that "We'll have all the niggers in
Africa over here in three years--we won't leave enough for seed."


THE SALE.

The Race-course at Savannah is situated about three miles from the
city, in a pleasant spot, nearly surrounded by woods. As it rained
violently during the two days of the sale, the place was only
accessible by carriages, and the result was, that few attended but
actual buyers, who had come from long distances, and could not afford
to lose the opportunity. If the affair had come off in Yankee land,
there would have been a dozen omnibuses running constantly between
the city and the Race-course, and some speculator would have bagged
a nice little sum of money by the operation. But nothing of the kind
was thought of here, and the only gainers were the livery stables, the
owners of which had sufficient Yankeeism to charge double and treble
prices.

The conveniences for getting to the ground were so limited that there
were not enough buyers to warrant the opening of the sale for an hour
or two after the advertised time. They dropped in, however, a few at a
time, and things began to look more encouragingly for the seller.

The negroes looked more uncomfortable than ever; the close confinement
in-doors for a number of days, and the drizzly, unpleasant weather,
began to tell on their condition. They moved about more listlessly,
and were fast losing the activity and springiness they had at first
shown. This morning they were all gathered into the long room of the
building erected as the "Grand Stand" of the Race-course, that they
might be immediately under the eye of the buyers. The room was about
a hundred feet long by twenty wide, and herein were crowded the poor
creatures, with much of their baggage, awaiting their respective calls
to step upon the block and be sold to the highest bidder. This morning
Mr. Pierce Butler appeared among his people, speaking to each one, and
being recognized with seeming pleasure by all. The men obsequiously
pulled off their hats and made that indescribable sliding hitch with
the foot which passes with a negro for a bow; and the women each
dropped the quick curtsy, which they seldom vouchsafe to any other than
their legitimate master and mistress. Occasionally, to a very old or
favorite servant, Mr. Butler would extend his gloved hand, which mark
of condescension was instantly hailed with grins of delight from all
the sable witnesses.

The room in which the sale actually took place immediately adjoined the
room of the negroes, and communicated with it by two large doors. The
sale room was open to the air on one side, commanding a view of the
entire Course. A small platform was raised about two feet and a-half
high, on which were placed the desks of the entry clerks, leaving room
in front of them for the auctioneer and the goods.

At about 11 o'clock the business men took their places, and announced
that the sale would begin. Mr. Bryan, the Negro Broker, is a dapper
little man, wearing spectacles and a yachting hat, sharp and sudden
in his movements, and perhaps the least bit in the world obtrusively
officious--as earnest in his language as he could be without actual
swearing, though acting much as if he would like to swear a little
at the critical moment; Mr. Bryan did not sell the goods, he merely
superintended the operation, and saw that the entry clerks did their
duty properly. The auctioneer proper was a Mr. Walsh, who deserves a
word of description. In personal appearance he is the very opposite of
Mr. Bryan, being careless in his dress instead of scrupulous, a large
man instead of a little one, a fat man instead of a lean one, and a
good-natured man instead of a fierce one. He is a rollicking old boy,
with an eye ever on the look-out, and that never lets a bidding nod
escape him; a hearty word for every bidder who cares for it, and plenty
of jokes to let off when the business gets a little slack. Mr. Walsh
has a florid complexion, not more so, perhaps, than is becoming, and
possibly not more so than is natural in a whiskey country. Not only is
his face red, but his skin has been taken off in spots by blisters of
some sort, giving him a peely look; so that, taking his face all in
all, the peeliness and the redness combined, he looks much as if he
had been boiled in the same pot with a red cabbage.

Mr. Walsh mounted the stand and announced the terms of the sale,
"one-third cash, the remainder payable in two equal annual instalments,
bearing interest from the day of sale, to be secured by approved
mortgage and personal security, or approved acceptances in Savannah,
Ga., or Charleston, S. C. Purchasers to pay for papers." The buyers,
who were present to the number of about two hundred, clustered around
the platform; while the negroes, who were not likely to be immediately
wanted, gathered into sad groups in the back-ground, to watch the
progress of the selling in which they were so sorrowfully interested.
The wind howled outside, and through the open side of the building the
driving rain came pouring in; the bar down stairs ceased for a short
time its brisk trade; the buyers lit fresh cigars, got ready their
catalogues and pencils, and the first lot of human chattels was led
upon the stand, not by a white man, but by a sleek mulatto, himself a
slave, and who seems to regard the selling of his brethren, in which he
so glibly assists, as a capital joke. It had been announced that the
negroes would be sold in "families," that is to say, a man would not
be parted from his wife, or a mother from a very young child. There is
perhaps as much policy as humanity in this arrangement, for thereby
many aged and unserviceable people are disposed of, who otherwise would
not find a ready sale.

The first family brought out were announced on the catalogue as


       NAME.     AGE.        REMARKS.
     1. George,   27   Prime Cotton Planter.
     2. Sue,      26   Prime Rice Planter.
     3. George,    6   Boy Child.
     4. Harry,     2   Boy Child.


The manner of buying was announced to be bidding a certain price
a-piece for the whole lot. Thus, George and his family were started at
$300, and were finally sold at $600 each, being $2,400 for the four. To
get an idea of the relative value of each one, we must suppose George
worth $1,200, Sue worth $900, Little George worth $200, and Harry worth
$100. Owing, however, to some misapprehension on the part of the buyer,
as to the manner of bidding, he did not take the family at this figure,
and they were put up and sold again, on the second day, when they
brought $620 each, or $2,480 for the whole--an advance of $80 over the
first sale.

Robert, and Luna his wife, who were announced as having "goitre,
otherwise very prime," brought the round sum of $1,005 each. But that
your readers may have an idea of the exact manner in which things
are done, I append a couple of pages of the catalogue used on this
occasion, which you can print verbatim:


      99--Kate's John, aged 30; rice, prime man.
     100--Betsey, 29; rice, unsound.
     101--Kate, 6.
     102--Violet, 3 months.
             Sold for $510 each.
     103--Wooster, 45; rice hand, and fair mason.
     104--Mary, 40; cotton hand.
             Sold for $300 each.
     105--Commodore Bob, aged; rice hand.
     106--Kate, aged; cotton.
     107--Linda, 19; cotton, prime young woman.
     108--Joe, 13; rice, prime boy.
             Sold for $600 each.
     109--Bob, 30; rice.
     110--Mary, 25; rice, prime woman.
             Sold for $1,135 each.
     111--Anson, 49; rice--ruptured, one eye.
     112--Violet, 55; rice hand.
             Sold for $250 each.
     113--Allen Jeffrey, 46; rice hand and sawyer in steam mill.
     114--Sikey, 43; rice hand.
     115--Watty, 5; infirm legs.
             Sold for $520 each.
     116--Rina, 18; rice, prime young woman.
     117--Lena, 1.
             Sold for $645 each.
     118--Pompey, 31; rice--lame in one foot.
     119--Kitty, 30; rice, prime woman.
     120--Pompey, Jr., 10; prime boy.
     121--John, 7.
     122--Noble, 1; boy.
             Sold for $580 each.
     341--Goin, 39; rice hand.
     342--Cassander, 35; cotton hand--has fits.
     343--Emiline, 19; cotton, prime young woman.
     344--Judy, 11; cotton, prime girl.
             Sold for $400 each.
     345--Dorcas, 17; cotton, prime woman.
     346--Joe, 3 months.
             Sold for $1,200 each.
     347--Tom, 22; cotton hand. Sold for $1,260.
     348--Judge Will, 55; rice hand. Sold for $325.
     349--Lowden, 54; cotton hand.
     350--Hagar, 50; cotton hand.
     351--Lowden, 15; cotton, prime boy.
     352--Silas, 13; cotton, prime boy.
     353--Lettia, 11; cotton, prime girl.
             Sold for $300 each.
     354--Fielding, 21; cotton, prime young man.
     355--Abel, 19; cotton, prime young man.
             Sold for $1,295 each.
     356--Smith's Bill, aged; sore leg.
     357--Leah, 46; cotton hand.
     358--Sally, 9.
             Withdrawn.
     359--Adam, 24; rice, prime man.
     360--Charlotte, 22; rice, prime woman.
     361--Lesh, 1.
             Sold for $750 each.
     362--Maria, 47; rice hand.
     363--Luna, 22; rice, prime woman.
     364--Clementina, 17; rice, prime young woman.
             Sold for $950 each.
     365--Tom, 48; rice hand.
     366--Harriet, 41; rice hand
     367--Wanney, 19; rice hand, prime young man.
     368--Deborah, 6.
     369--Infant, 3 months.
             Sold for $700 each.


It seems as if every shade of character capable of being implicated in
the sale of human flesh and blood was represented among the buyers.
There was the Georgia fast young man, with his pantaloons tucked into
his boots, his velvet cap jauntily dragged over to one side, his cheek
full of tobacco, which he bites from a huge plug, that resembles
more than anything else an old bit of a rusty wagon tire, and who
is altogether an animal of quite a different breed from your New
York fast man. His ready revolver, or his convenient knife, is ready
for instant use in case of a heated argument. White-neck-clothed,
gold-spectacled, and silver-haired old men were there, resembling in
appearance that noxious breed of sanctimonious deacons we have at the
North, who are perpetually leaving documents at your door that you
never read, and the business of whose mendicant life it is to eternally
solicit subscriptions for charitable associations, of which they are
treasurers. These gentry, with quiet step and subdued voice, moved
carefully about among the live stock, ignoring, as a general rule, the
men, but tormenting the women with questions which, when accidentally
overheard by the disinterested spectator, bred in that spectator's
mind an almost irresistible desire to knock somebody down. And then,
all imaginable varieties of rough, backwoods rowdies, who began the
day in a spirited manner, but who, as its hours progressed, and their
practice at the bar became more prolific in results, waxed louder and
talkier and more violent, were present, and added a characteristic
feature to the assemblage. Those of your readers who have read "Uncle
Tom,"--and who has not?--will remember, with peculiar feelings,
Legree, the slave-driver and woman-whipper. That that character is not
been overdrawn, or too highly colored, there is abundant testimony.
Witness the subjoined dialogue: A party of men were conversing on the
fruitful subject of managing refractory "niggers;" some were for severe
whipping, some recommending branding, one or two advocated other modes
of torture, but one huge brute of a man, who had not taken an active
part in the discussion, save to assent, with approving nod, to any
unusually barbarous proposition, at last broke his silence by saying,
in an oracular way, "You may say what you like about managing niggers;
I'm a driver myself, and I've had some experience, and I ought to know.
You can manage ordinary niggers by lickin' 'em, and givin' 'em a taste
of the hot iron once in awhile when they're extra ugly; but if a nigger
really sets himself up against me, I can't never have any patience with
him. I just get my pistol and shoot him right down; and that's the best
way."

And this brute was talking to gentlemen, and his remarks were listened
to with attention, and his assertions assented to by more than one in
the knot of listeners. But all this time the sale was going on, and
the merry Mr. Walsh, with many a quip and jest, was beguiling the
time when the bidding was slow. The expression on the faces of all who
stepped on the block was always the same, and told of more anguish than
it is in the power of words to express. Blighted homes, crushed hopes
and broken hearts, was the sad story to be read in all the anxious
faces. Some of them regarded the sale with perfect indifference, never
making a motion, save to turn from one side to the other at the word
of the dapper Mr. Bryan, that all the crowd might have a fair view of
their proportions, and then, when the sale was accomplished, stepped
down from the block without caring to cast even a look at the buyer,
who now held all their happiness in his hands. Others, again, strained
their eyes with eager glances from one buyer to another as the bidding
went on, trying with earnest attention to follow the rapid voice of
the auctioneer. Sometimes, two persons only would be bidding for the
same chattel, all the others having resigned the contest, and then the
poor creature on the block, conceiving an instantaneous preference for
one of the buyers over the other, would regard the rivalry with the
intensest interest, the expression of his face changing with every bid,
settling into a half smile of joy if the favorite buyer persevered unto
the end and secured the property, and settling down into a look of
hopeless despair if the other won the victory.


DAPHNEY'S BABY.

The family of Primus, plantation carpenter, consisting of Daphney his
wife, with her young babe, and Dido, a girl of three years old, were
reached in due course of time. Daphney had a large shawl, which she
kept carefully wrapped round her infant and herself. This unusual
proceeding attracted much attention, and provoked many remarks, such as
these:

"What do you keep your nigger covered up for? Pull off her blanket."

"What's the matter with the gal? Has she got the headache?"

"What's the fault of the gal? Ain't she sound? Pull off her rags and
let us see her."

"Who's going to bid on that nigger, if you keep her covered up. Let's
see her face."

And a loud chorus of similar remarks, emphasized with profanity, and
mingled with sayings too indecent and obscene to be even hinted at
here, went up from the crowd of chivalrous Southern gentlemen.

At last the auctioneer obtained a hearing long enough to explain that
there was no attempt to practise any deception in the case--the parties
were not to be wronged in any way; he had no desire to palm off on
them an inferior article; but the truth of the matter was that Daphney
had been confined only fifteen days ago, and he thought that on that
account she was entitled to the slight indulgence of a blanket, to keep
from herself and child the chill air and the driving rain.

Will your lady readers look at the circumstances of this case? The day
was the 2d day of March. Daphney's baby was born into the world on St.
Valentine's happy day, the 14th of February.

Since her confinement, Daphney had traveled from the plantation to
Savannah, where she had been kept in a shed for six days. On the sixth
or seventh day after her sickness, she had left her bed, taken a
railroad journey across the country to the shambles, was there exposed
for six days to the questionings and insults of the negro speculators,
and then on the fifteenth day after her confinement was put up on the
block, with her husband and her other child, and, with her new-born
baby in her arms, sold to the highest bidder.

It was very considerate of Daphney to be sick before the sale, for her
wailing babe was worth to Mr. Butler all of a hundred dollars. The
family sold for $625 a-piece, or $2,500 for the four.


BOB AND MARY.

This was a couple not quite a year married, and were down in the
catalogue as "prime." They had no children yet; Mary, with a
reprehensible lack of that tender interest in Mr. Butler's affairs that
had been exhibited in so eminent a degree by Daphney, had disappointed
that worthy man's expectations, and the baby as yet was not. But Bob
and Mary sold for $1,135 a-piece, for all that.

In another instance, Margaret, the wife of Doctor George, who was
confined on February 16, though the name of herself and family were
inserted in the catalogue, did not come to the sale, and consequently,
they were not disposed of at all. As Margaret's baby was fully four
days old at the time she was required to start on her journey to
Savannah, we can only look at her refusal to go as a most culpable
instance of perversity. Margaret should be whipped, and branded, and
otherwise kindly admonished of her great sin in thus disappointing the
reasonable expectations of so kind a master. But Mr. Butler bore with
her in a truly Christian spirit, and uttered no reproach--in public
at least. It was the more unkind of Margaret, too, because there were
six in the family who would have brought probably $4,000, and all were
detained from the sale by the contumacy of misguided Margaret.

While on the subject of babies, it may be mentioned that Amity, chattel
No. 316, wife of Prince, chattel No. 315, had testified her earnest
desire to contribute all in her power to the worldly wealth of her
master by bringing into the world at one time chattles Nos. 317 and
318, being a fine pair of twin boys, just a year old. It is not in
evidence that Amity received from her master any testimonial of his
appreciating her good behavior on this occasion, but it is certain
that she brought a great price, the four, Prince, Amity and the twins
selling for $670 a-piece, being a total of $2,680.

Many other babies, of all ages of baby-hood, were sold, but there was
nothing particularly interesting about them. There were some thirty
babies in the lot; they are esteemed worth to the master a hundred
dollars the day they are born, and to increase in value at the rate of
a hundred dollars a year till they are sixteen or seventeen years old,
at which age they bring the best prices.


THE LOVE STORY OF JEFFREY AND DORCAS.

Jeffrey, chattel No. 319, marked as a "prime cotton hand," aged 23
years, was put up. Jeffrey being a likely lad, the competition was
high. The first bid was $1,100, and he was finally sold for $1,310.
Jeffrey was sold alone; he had no incumbrance in the shape of an aged
father or mother, who must necessarily be sold with him; nor had he
any children, for Jeffrey was not married. But Jeffrey, chattel No.
319, being human in his affections, had dared to cherish a love for
Dorcas, chattel No. 278; and Dorcas, not having the fear of her master
before her eyes, had given her heart to Jeffrey. Whether what followed
was a just retribution on Jeffrey and Dorcas, for daring to take such
liberties with their master's property as to exchange hearts, or
whether it only goes to prove that with black as with white the saying
holds, that "the course of true love never did run smooth," cannot now
be told. Certain it is that these two lovers were not to realize the
consummation of their hopes in happy wedlock. Jeffrey and Dorcas had
told their loves, had exchanged their simple vows, and were betrothed,
each to the other as dear, and each by the other as fondly beloved as
though their skins had been of fairer color. And who shall say that, in
the sight of Heaven and all holy angels, these two humble hearts were
not as closely wedded as any two of the prouder race that call them
slaves?

Be that as it may, Jeffrey was sold. He finds out his new master;
and, hat in hand, the big tears standing in his eyes, and his voice
trembling with emotion, he stands before that master and tells his
simple story, praying that his betrothed may be bought with him. Though
his voice trembles, there is no embarrassment in his manner; his fears
have killed all the bashfulness that would naturally attend such a
recital to a stranger, and before unsympathizing witnesses; he feels
that he is pleading for the happiness of her he loves, as well as for
his own, and his tale is told in a frank and manly way.

"I loves Dorcas, young Mas'r; I loves her well an' true; she says she
loves me, and I know she does; de good Lord knows I loves her better
than I loves any one in de wide world--never can love another woman
half so well. Please buy Dorcas, Mas'r. We're be good sarvants to you
long as we live. We're be married right soon, young Mas'r, and de
chillun will be healthy and strong, Mas'r, and dey'll be good sarvants,
too. Please buy Dorcas, young Mas'r. We loves each other a heap--do,
really true, Mas'r."

Jeffrey then remembers that no loves and hopes of his are to enter into
the bargain at all, but in the earnestness of his love he has forgotten
to base his plea on other ground till now, when he bethinks him and
continues, with his voice not trembling now, save with eagerness to
prove how worthy of many dollars is the maiden of his heart:

"Young Mas'r, Dorcas prime woman--A1 woman, sa. Tall gal, sir; long
arms, strong, healthy, and can do a heap of work in a day. She is one
of de best rice hands on de whole plantation; worth $1,200 easy, Mas'r,
an' fus'rate bargain at that."

The man seems touched by Jeffrey's last remarks, and bids him fetch out
his "gal, and let's see what she looks like."

Jeffrey goes into the long room, and presently returns with
Dorcas, looking very sad and self-possessed, without a particle of
embarrassment at the trying position in which she is placed. She makes
the accustomed curtsy, and stands meekly with her hands clasped across
her bosom, waiting the result. The buyer regards her with a critical
eye, and growls in a low voice that the "gal has good p'ints." Then
he goes on to a more minute and careful examination of her working
abilities. He turns her around, makes her stoop, and walk; and then he
takes off her turban to look at her head that no wound or disease be
concealed by the gay handkerchief; he looks at her teeth, and feels
of her arms, and at last announces himself pleased with the result of
his observations, whereat Jeffrey, who has stood near, trembling with
eager hope, is overjoyed, and he smiles for the first time. The buyer
then crowns Jeffrey's happiness by making a promise that he will buy
her, if the price isn't run up too high. And the two lovers step aside
and congratulate each other on their good fortune. But Dorcas is not
to be sold till the next day, and there are twenty-four long hours of
feverish expectation.

Early next morning is Jeffrey alert, and, hat in hand, encouraged to
unusual freedom by the greatness of the stake for which he plays, he
addresses every buyer, and of all who will listen he begs the boon of a
word to be spoken to his new master to encourage him to buy Dorcas. And
all the long morning he speaks in his homely way with all who know him,
that they will intercede to save his sweetheart from being sold away
from him forever. No one has the heart to deny a word of promise and
encouragement to the poor fellow, and, joyous with so much kindness,
his hopes and spirits gradually rise until he feels almost certain that
the wish of heart will be accomplished. And Dorcas, too, is smiling,
for is not Jeffrey's happiness her own?

At last comes the trying moment, and Dorcas steps up on the stand.

But now a most unexpected feature in the drama is for the first time
unmasked: _Dorcas is not to be sold alone_, but with a family of four
others. Full of dismay, Jeffrey looks to his master, who shakes his
head, for, although he might be induced to buy Dorcas alone, he has no
use for the rest of the family. Jeffrey reads his doom in his master's
look, and turns away, the tears streaming down his honest face.

So Dorcas is sold, and her toiling life is to be spent in the cotton
fields of South Carolina, while Jeffrey goes to the rice plantation of
the Great Swamp.

And to-morrow, Jeffrey and Dorcas are to say their tearful farewell,
and go their separate ways in life, to meet no more as mortal beings.

But didn't Mr. Pierce Butler give them a silver dollar a-piece? Who
shall say there is no magnanimity in slave-owners?

In another hour I see Dorcas in the long room, sitting motionless as a
statue, with her head covered with a shawl. And I see Jeffrey, who goes
to his new master, pulls off his hat and says: "I'se very much obliged,
Mas'r, to you for tryin' to help me. I knows you would have done it if
you could--thank you, Mas'r--thank you--but--its--berry--hard"--and
here the poor fellow breaks down entirely and walks away, covering his
face with his battered hat, and sobbing like a very child.

He is soon surrounded by a group of his colored friends, who, with an
instinctive delicacy most unlooked for, stand quiet, and with uncovered
heads, about him.

Anson and Violet, chattels Nos. 111 and 112, were sold for $250 each,
both being old, and Anson being down in the catalogue as "ruptured and
as having one eye." Violet was sold as being sick. Her disease was
probably consumption, which supposition gave rise to the following
feeling conversation between two buyers:

"Cheap gal, that, Major!"

"Don't think so. They may talk about her being sick; it's no easy
sickness she's got. She's got consumption, and the man that buys her'll
have to be a doctrin' her all the time, and she'll die in less than
three months. I won't have anything to do with her--don't want any half
dead niggers about me."


THE MARKET VALUE OF AN EYE.

Guy, chattel No. 419, "a prime young man," sold for $1,280, being
without blemish; his age was twenty years, and he was altogether a
fine article. His next-door neighbor, Andrew, chattel No. 420, was his
very counterpart in all marketable points, in size, age, skill, and
everything save that he had lost his right eye. Andrew sold for only
$1,040, from which we argue that the market value of the right eye in
the Southern country is $240.


AN UNEXPECTED MARRIAGE.

When the family of Mingo, consisting of his wife, two sons and a
daughter, was called for, it was announced by the auctioneer that
chattel No. 322, Dembo, the eldest son, aged 20, had the evening before
procured the services of a minister, and been joined in wedlock to
chattel No. 404, Frances, and that he should be compelled to put up
the bride and groom in one lot. They were called up, and, as was to be
expected, their appearance was the signal for a volley of coarse jokes
from the auctioneer, and of ribald remarks from the surrounding crowd.
The newly-married pair bore it bravely, although one refined gentleman
took hold of Frances's lips and pulled them apart, to see her age.

This sort of thing it is that makes Northern blood boil, and Northern
fists clench with a laudable desire to hit somebody. It was almost too
much for endurance to stand and see those brutal slave-drivers pushing
the women about, pulling their lips apart with their not too cleanly
hands, and committing many another indecent act, while the husbands,
fathers and brothers of those women were compelled to witness these
things, without the power to resent the outrage.

Dembo and Frances were at last struck off for $1,320 each, and went to
spend their honey-moon on a cotton plantation in Alabama.


THE CASE OF JOSHUA'S MOLLY.

The auctioneer brought up Joshua's Molly and family. He announced that
Molly insisted that she was lame in her left foot, and perversely would
walk lame, although for his part, he did not believe a word of it. He
had caused her to be examined by an eminent physician in Savannah,
which medical light had declared that Joshua's Molly was not lame, but
was only shamming. However, the gentlemen must judge for themselves and
bid accordingly. So Molly was put through her paces, and compelled to
trot up and down along the stage, to go up and down the steps, and to
exercise her feet in various ways, but always with the same result, the
left foot _would_ be lame. She was finally sold for $695.

Whether she really was lame or not no one knows but herself, but
it must be remembered that to a slave a lameness, or anything that
decreases his market value, is a thing to be rejoiced over. A man in
the prime of life, worth $1,600 or thereabouts, can have little hope
of ever being able, by any little savings of his own, to purchase his
liberty. But let him have a rupture, or lose a limb, or sustain any
other injury that renders him of much less service to his owner, and
reduces his value to $300 or $400, and he may hope to accumulate that
sum, and eventually to purchase his liberty. Freedom without health is
infinitely sweeter than health without freedom.

And so the Great Sale went on for two long days, during which time
there were sold 429 men, women and children. There were 436 announced
to be sold, but a few were detained on the plantations by sickness.

At the close of the sale, on the last day, several baskets of champagne
were produced, and all were invited to partake, the wine being at the
expense of the broker, Mr. Bryan.

The total amount of the sale foots up $303,850--the proceeds of the
first day being $161,480, and of the second day $142,370.

The highest sum paid for any one family was given for Sally Walker and
her five children, who were mostly grown up. The price was $6,180.

The highest price paid for a single man was $1,750, which was given for
William, a "fair carpenter and caulker."

The highest price paid for a woman was $1,250, which was given for
Jane, "cotton hand and house servant."

The lowest price paid was for Anson and Violet, a gray-haired couple,
each having numbered more than fifty years; they brought but $250
a-piece.


MR. PIERCE BUTLER GIVES HIS PEOPLE A DOLLAR A-PIECE.

Leaving the Race buildings, where the scenes we have described took
place, a crowd of negroes were seen gathered eagerly about a white man.
That man was Pierce M. Butler, of the free City of Philadelphia, who
was solacing the wounded hearts of the people he had sold from their
firesides and their homes, by doling out to them small change at the
rate of a dollar a-head. To every negro he had sold, who presented his
claim for the paltry pittance, he gave the munificent stipend of one
whole dollar, in specie; he being provided with two canvas bags of 25
cent pieces, fresh from the mint, to give an additional glitter to his
generosity.

And now come the scenes of the last partings--of the final separations
of those who were akin, or who had been such dear friends from youth
that no ties of kindred could bind them closer--of those who were all
in all to each other, and for whose bleeding hearts there shall be
no earthly comfort--the parting of parents and children, of brother
from brother, and the rending of sister from a sister's bosom; and O!
hardest, cruellest of all, the tearing asunder of loving hearts, wedded
in all save the one ceremony of the Church--these scenes pass all
description; it is not meet for pen to meddle with tears so holy.

As the last family stepped down from the block, the rain ceased, for
the first time in four days, the clouds broke away, and the soft
sunlight fell on the scene. The unhappy slaves had many of them been
already removed, and others were now departing with their new masters.

That night, not a steamer left that Southern port, not a train of cars
sped away from that cruel city, that did not bear each its own sad
burden of those unhappy ones, whose only crime is that they are not
strong and wise. Some of them maimed and wounded, some scarred and
gashed, by accident, or by the hand of ruthless drivers--all sad and
sorrowful as human hearts can be.

But the stars shone out as brightly as if such things had never been,
the blushing fruit-trees poured their fragrance on the evening air, and
the scene was as calmly sweet and quiet as if Man had never marred the
glorious beauties of Earth by deeds of cruelty and wrong.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT BECAME OF THE SLAVES ON A GEORGIA PLANTATION? ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


