The Project Gutenberg eBook of April twilights, and other poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: April twilights, and other poems

Author: Willa Cather

Release date: January 17, 2021 [eBook #64318]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APRIL TWILIGHTS, AND OTHER POEMS ***

                            APRIL TWILIGHTS
                            AND OTHER POEMS




                         BOOKS BY WILLA CATHER

                            [Illustration]


                          ALEXANDER’S BRIDGE

                              O PIONEERS

                         THE SONG OF THE LARK

                              MY ANTONIA

                      YOUTH AND THE BRIGHT MEDUSA

                              ONE OF OURS

                              A LOST LADY
                          (_in preparation_)

                            [Illustration]




                            APRIL TWILIGHTS

                            AND OTHER POEMS

                                  BY

                             WILLA CATHER

                            [Illustration]

                            ALFRED A KNOPF
                          NEW YORK · MCMXXIII


                            COPYRIGHT, 1923
                       BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

                       _Published, April, 1923_


             MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                             To my Father
                            for a Valentine


     _The verses in Part I of this volume are reprinted from an early
     volume_, APRIL TWILIGHTS, _published in 1903. Those in Part II are
     of later composition, and for permission to republish them I am
     indebted to the editors of_ SCRIBNER’S MAGAZINE, MCCLURE’S
     MAGAZINE, _and the_ CENTURY MAGAZINE.

                                                          WILLA CATHER






CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

“Grandmither, think not I forget”                                     13

Fides, Spes                                                           15

The Tavern                                                            16

The Hawthorn Tree                                                     17

The Poor Minstrel                                                     18

Antinous                                                              20

London Roses                                                          21

Winter at Delphi                                                      22

Paradox                                                               24

In Media Vita                                                         25

Evening Song                                                          26

Lament for Marsyas                                                    27

“I Sought the Wood in Winter”                                         28

“Sleep, Minstrel, Sleep”                                              30

In Rose-Time                                                          31

Poppies on Ludlow Castle                                              33

Prairie Dawn                                                          35

Aftermath                                                             36

Thou Art the Pearl                                                    37

Arcadian Winter                                                       38

Provençal Legend                                                      40

The Encore                                                            42

Song                                                                  43

L’Envoi                                                               44

The Palatine                                                          47

The Gaul in the Capitol                                               49

A Likeness                                                            50

The Swedish Mother                                                    52

Spanish Johnny                                                        54

Autumn Melody                                                         55

Prairie Spring                                                        56

Macon Prairie                                                         57

Street in Packingtown                                                 60

A Silver Cup                                                          62

Recognition                                                           65

Going Home                                                            66




                                PART I




                    APRIL TWILIGHTS AND OTHER POEMS

                            [Illustration]




               “GRANDMITHER, THINK NOT I FORGET”


    Grandmither, think not I forget, when I come back to town,
    An’ wander the old ways again an’ tread them up an’ down.
    I never smell the clover bloom, nor see the swallows pass,
    Without I mind how good ye were unto a little lass.
    I never hear the winter rain a-pelting all night through,
    Without I think and mind me of how cold it falls on you.
    And if I come not often to your bed beneath the thyme,
    Mayhap ’t is that I’d change wi’ ye, and gie my bed for thine,
          Would like to sleep in thine.

    I never hear the summer winds among the roses blow,
    Without I wonder why it was ye loved the lassie so.
    Ye gave me cakes and lollipops and pretty toys a score,--
    I never thought I should come back and ask ye now for more.
    Grandmither, gie me your still, white hands, that lie upon your breast,
    For mine do beat the dark all night and never find me rest;
    They grope among the shadows an’ they beat the cold black air,
    They go seekin’ in the darkness, an’ they never find him there,
          An’ they never find him there.

    Grandmither, gie me your sightless eyes, that I may never see
    His own a-burnin’ full o’ love that must not shine for me.
    Grandmither, gie me your peaceful lips, white as the kirkyard snow,
    For mine be red wi’ burnin’ thirst, an’ he must never know.
    Grandmither, gie me your clay-stopped ears, that I may never hear
    My lad a-singin’ in the night when I am sick wi’ fear;
    A-singin’ when the moonlight over a’ the land is white--
    Aw God! I’ll up an’ go to him a-singin’ in the night,
          A-callin’ in the night.

    Grandmither, gie me your clay-cold heart that has forgot to ache,
    For mine be fire within my breast and yet it cannot break.
    It beats an’ throbs forever for the things that must not be,--
    An’ can ye not let me creep in an’ rest awhile by ye?
    A little lass afeard o’ dark slept by ye years agone--
    Ah, she has found what night can hold ’twixt sunset an’ the dawn!
    So when I plant the rose an’ rue above your grave for ye,
    Ye’ll know it’s under rue an’ rose that I would like to be,
          That I would like to be.




          FIDES, SPES


    Joy is come to the little
            Everywhere;
    Pink to the peach and pink to the apple,
            White to the pear.
    Stars are come to the dogwood,
            Astral, pale;
    Mists are pink on the red-bud,
            Veil after veil.
    Flutes for the feathery locusts,
            Soft as spray;
    Tongues of lovers for chestnuts, poplars,
            Babbling May.
    Yellow plumes for the willows’
            Wind-blown hair;
    Oak trees and sycamores only
            Comfortless, bare.
    Sore from steel and the watching,
            Somber and old,
    (Wooing robes for the beeches, larches,
            Splashed with gold,
    Breath of love from the lilacs,
            Warm with noon,)
    Great hearts cold when the little
            Beat mad so soon.
    What is their faith to bear it
            Till it come,
    Waiting with rain-cloud and swallow,
            Frozen, dumb?




          THE TAVERN


    In the tavern of my heart
      Many a one has sat before,
    Drunk red wine and sung a stave,
      And, departing, come no more.
    When the night was cold without,
      And the ravens croaked of storm,
    They have sat them at my hearth,
      Telling me my house was warm.

    As the lute and cup went round,
      They have rhymed me well in lay;--
    When the hunt was on at morn,
      Each, departing, went his way.
    On the walls, in compliment,
      Some would scrawl a verse or two,
    Some have hung a willow branch,
      Or a wreath of corn-flowers blue.

    Ah! my friend, when thou dost go,
      Leave no wreath of flowers for me;
    Not pale daffodils nor rue,
      Violets nor rosemary.
    Spill the wine upon the lamps,
      Tread the fire, and bar the door;
    So despoil the wretched place,
      None will come forevermore.




          THE HAWTHORN TREE


    Across the shimmering meadows--
    Ah, when he came to me!
    In the spring-time,
    In the night-time,
    In the starlight,
    Beneath the hawthorn tree.

    Up from the misty marsh-land--
    Ah, when he climbed to me!
    To my white bower,
    To my sweet rest,
    To my warm breast,
    Beneath the hawthorn tree.

    Ask of me what the birds sang,
    High in the hawthorn tree;
    What the breeze tells,
    What the rose smells,
    What the stars shine--
    Not what he said to me!




          THE POOR MINSTREL


    _Does the darkness cradle thee
    Than mine arms more tenderly?_
    Do the angels God hath put
      There to guard thy lonely sleep--
    One at head and one at foot--
      Watch more fond and constant keep?
    When the black-bird sings in May,
      And the spring is in the wood,
    Would you never trudge the way
      Over hill-tops, if you could?
    Was my harp so hard a load
      Even on the sunny morns
    When the plumèd huntsmen rode
      To the music of their horns?
    Hath the love that lit the stars,
      Fills the sea and moulds the flowers,
    Whose completeness nothing mars,
      Made forgot what once was ours?
    Christ hath perfect rest to give--
      Stillness and perpetual peace;
    You, who found it hard to live,
      Sleep and sleep, without surcease.

    Christ hath stars to light thy porch,
      Silence after fevered song;--
    I had but a minstrel’s torch
      And the way was wet and long.
    Sleep. No more on winter nights,
      Harping at some castle gate,
    Thou must see the revel lights
      Stream upon our cold estate.
    Bitter was the bread of song
      While you tarried in my tent,
    And the jeering of the throng
      Hurt you, as it came and went.
    When you slept upon my breast
      Grief had wed me long ago:
    Christ hath his perpetual rest
      For thy weariness. But oh!
    When I sleep beside the road,
      Thanking God thou liest not so,
    Brother to the owl and toad,
      Could’st thou, Dear, but let me know,
    _Does the darkness cradle thee
    Than mine arms more tenderly?_




          ANTINOUS


    With attributes of gods they sculptured him,
        Hermes, Osiris, but were never wise
    To lift the level, frowning brow of him
        Or dull the mortal misery in his eyes,
    The scornful weariness of every limb,
        The dust-begotten doubt that never dies,
    Antinous, beneath thy lids, though dim,
    The curling smoke of altars rose to thee,
    Conjuring thee to comfort and content.
        An emperor sent his galleys wide and far
    To seek thy healing for thee. Yea, and spent
        Honour and treasure and red fruits of war
        To lift thy heaviness, lest thou should’st mar
    The head that was an empire’s glory, bent
    A little, as the heavy poppies are.
        Did the perfection of thy beauty pain
    Thy limbs to bear it? Did it ache to be,
        As song hath ached in men, or passion vain?
    Or lay it like some heavy robe on thee?
        Was thy sick soul drawn from thee like the rain,
    Or drunk up as the dead are drunk each hour
    To feed the colour of some tulip flower?




          LONDON ROSES


    “Rowses, Rowses! Penny a bunch!” they tell you--
    Slattern girls in Trafalgar, eager to sell you.
    Roses, roses, red in the Kensington sun,
    Holland Road, High Street, Bayswater, see you and smell you--
    Roses of London town, red till the summer is done.

    Roses, roses, locust and lilac, perfuming
    West End, East End, wondrously budding and blooming
    Out of the black earth, rubbed in a million hands,
    Foot-trod, sweat-sour over and under, entombing
    Highways of darkness, deep gutted with iron bands.

    “Rowses, rowses! Penny a bunch!” they tell you,
    Ruddy blooms of corruption, see you and smell you,
    Born of stale earth, fallowed with squalor and tears--
    North shire, south shire, none are like these, I tell you,
    Roses of London perfumed with a thousand years.




          WINTER AT DELPHI


    Cold are the stars of the night,
      Wild is the tempest crying,
    Fast through the velvet dark
      Little white flakes are flying.
    Still is the House of Song.
      But the fire on the hearth is burning;
    And the lamps are trimmed, and the cup
      Is full for his day of returning.
    His watchers are fallen asleep,
      They wait but his call to follow,
    Ay, to the ends of the earth--
      But Apollo, the god, Apollo?

    Sick is the heart in my breast,
      Mine eyes are blinded with weeping;
    The god who never comes back,
      The watch that forever is keeping.
    Service of gods is hard;
      Deep lies the snow on my pillow.
    For him the laurel and song,
      Weeping for me and the willow:
    Empty my arms and cold
      As the nest forgot of the swallow;
    Birds will come back with the spring,--
      But Apollo, the god, Apollo?

    Hope will come back with the spring,
      Joy with the lark’s returning;
    Love must awake betimes,
      When crocus buds are a-burning.
    Hawthorns will follow the snow,
      The robin his tryst be keeping;
    Winds will blow in the May,
      Waking the pulses a-sleeping.
    Snowdrops will whiten the hills,
      Violets hide in the hollow:
    Pan will be drunken and rage--
      But Apollo, the god, Apollo?




          PARADOX


    I knew them both upon Miranda’s isle,
      Which is of youth a sea-bound seigniory:
    Misshapen Caliban, so seeming vile,
      And Ariel, proud prince of minstrelsy,
    Who did forsake the sunset for my tower
      And like a star above my slumber burned.
    The night was held in silver chains by power
      Of melody, in which all longings yearned--
    Star-grasping youth in one wild strain expressed,
      Tender as dawn, insistent as the tide;
    The heart of night and summer stood confessed.
      I rose aglow and flung the lattice wide--
    Ah, jest of art, what mockery and pang!
      Alack, it was poor Caliban who sang.




          IN MEDIA VITA


    Streams of the spring a-singing,
      Winds of the May that blow,
    Birds from the Southland winging,
      Buds in the grasses below.
    Clouds that speed hurrying over,
      And the climbing rose by the wall,
    Singing of bees in the clover,
      And the dead, under all!

    Lads and their sweethearts lying
      In the cleft of the windy hill;
    Hearts that are hushed of their sighing,
      Lips that are tender and still.
    Stars in the purple gloaming,
      Flowers that suffuse and fall,
    Twitter of bird-mates homing,
      And the dead, under all!

    Herdsman abroad with his collie,
      Girls on their way to the fair,
    Young lads a-chasing their folly,
      Parsons a-praying their prayer.
    Children their kites a-flying,
      Grandsires that nod by the wall,
    Mothers soft lullabies sighing,
      And the dead, under all!




          EVENING SONG


    Dear love, what thing of all the things that be
    Is ever worth one thought from you or me,
            Save only Love,
            Save only Love?

    The days so short, the nights so quick to flee,
    The world so wide, so deep and dark the sea,
            So dark the sea;

    So far the suns and every listless star,
    Beyond their light--Ah! dear, who knows how far,
            Who knows how far?

    One thing of all dim things I know is true,
    The heart within me knows, and tells it you,
            And tells it you.

    So blind is life, so long at last is sleep,
    And none but Love to bid us laugh or weep,
            And none but Love,
            And none but Love.




          LAMENT FOR MARSYAS


    Marsyas sleeps. Oh, never wait,
    Maidens, by the city gate,
    Till he come to plunder gold
    Of the daffodils you hold,
    Or your branches white with may;
    He is whiter gone than they.
    He will startle you no more
    When along the river shore
    Damsels beat the linen clean.
    Nor when maidens play at ball
    Will he catch it where it fall:
    Though ye wait for him and call,
    He will answer not, I ween.

    Happy Earth to hold him so,
    Still and satisfied and low,
    Giving him his will--ah, more
    Than a woman could before!
    Still forever holding up
    To his parted lips the cup
    Which hath eased him, when to bless
    All who loved were powerless.
    Ah! for that too-lovely head,
    Low among the laureled dead,
    Many a rose earth oweth yet;
    Many a yellow jonquil brim,
    Many a hyacinth dewy-dim,
    For the singing breath of him--
    Sweeter than the violet.




“I SOUGHT THE WOOD IN WINTER”


    I sought the wood in summer
            When every twig was green;
    The rudest boughs were tender,
            And buds were pink between.
    Light-fingered aspens trembled
            In fitful sun and shade,
    And daffodils were golden
            In every starry glade.
    The brook sang like a robin--
            My hand could check him where
    The lissome maiden willows
            Shook out their yellow hair.

    “How frail a thing is Beauty,”
            I said, “when every breath
    She gives the vagrant summer
            But swifter woos her death.
    For this the star dust troubles,
            For this have ages rolled:
    To deck the wood for bridal
            And slay her with the cold.”

    I sought the wood in winter
            When every leaf was dead;
    Behind the wind-whipped branches
            The winter sun set red.
    The coldest star was rising
            To greet that bitter air,
    The oaks were writhen giants;
            Nor bud nor bloom was there.
    The birches, white and slender,
            In deathless marble stood,
    The brook, a white immortal,
            Slept silent in the wood.

    “How sure a thing is Beauty,”
            I cried. “No bolt can slay,
    No wave nor shock despoil her,
            No ravishers dismay.
    Her warriors are the angels
            That cherish from afar,
    Her warders people Heaven
            And watch from every star.
    The granite hills are slighter,
            The sea more like to fail;
    Behind the rose the planet,
            The Law behind the veil.”




“SLEEP, MINSTREL, SLEEP”


    Sleep, minstrel, sleep; the winter wind’s awake,
          And yellow April’s buried deep and cold.
    The wood is black, and songful things forsake
          The haunted forest when the year is old.
    Above the drifted snow the aspens quake,
          The scourging clouds a shrunken moon enfold,
    Denying all that nights of summer spake
          And swearing false the summer’s globe of gold.

    Sleep, minstrel, sleep; in such a bitter night
          Thine azure song would seek the stars in vain;
    Thy rose and roundelay the winter’s spite
          Would scarcely spare--O never wake again!
    These leaden skies do not thy masques invite,
          Thy sunny breath would warm not their disdain;
    How should’st thou sing to boughs with winter dight,
          Or gather marigolds in winter rain?

    Sleep, minstrel, sleep; we do not grow more kind;
          Your cloak was thin, your wound was wet and deep;
    More bitter breath there was than winter wind,
          And hotter tears than now thy lovers weep.
    Upon the world-old breast of comfort find
          How gentle Darkness thee will gently keep.
    Thou wert the summer’s, and thy joy declined
          When winter winds awoke. Sleep, minstrel, sleep.




          IN ROSE-TIME


    _Oh, this is the joy of the rose:
              That it blows,
                And goes._

    Winter lasts a five-month,
      Spring-time stays but one;
    Yellow blow the rye-fields
      When the rose is done.
    Pines are clad at Yuletide
      When the birch is bare,
    And the holly’s greenest
      In the frosty air.

    Sorrow keeps a stone house
      Builded grim and gray;
    Pleasure hath a straw thatch
      Hung with lanterns gay.
    On her petty savings
      Niggard Prudence thrives,
    Passion, ere the moonset,
      Bleeds a thousand lives.

    Virtue hath a warm hearth--
      Folly’s dead and drowned;
    Friendship hath her own when
      Love is underground.
    Ah! for me the madness
      Of the spendthrift flower,
    Burning myriad sunsets
      In a single hour.

    _For this is the joy of the rose:
              That it blows,
                And goes._




          POPPIES ON LUDLOW CASTLE


    Through halls of vanished pleasure,
          And hold of vanished power,
    And crypt of faith forgotten,
          I came to Ludlow tower.

    A-top of arch and stairway,
          Of crypt, and donjon cell,
    Of council hall, and chamber,
          Of wall, and ditch, and well,

    High over grated turrets
          Where clinging ivies run,
    A thousand scarlet poppies
          Enticed the rising sun,

    Upon the topmost turret,
          With death and damp below,--
    Three hundred years of spoilage,--
          The crimson poppies grow.

    This hall it was that bred him,
          These hills that knew him brave,
    The gentlest English singer
          That fills an English grave.

    How have they heart to blossom
          So cruel gay and red,
    When beauty so hath perished
          And valour so hath sped?

    When knights so fair are rotten,
          And captains true asleep,
    And singing lips are dust-stopped
          Six English earth-feet deep?

    When ages old remind me
          How much hath gone for naught,
    What wretched ghost remaineth
          Of all that flesh hath wrought;

    Of love and song and warring,
          Of adventure and play,
    Of art and comely building,
          Of faith and form and fray--

    I’ll mind the flowers of pleasure,
          Of short-lived youth and sleep,
    That drank the sunny weather
          A-top of Ludlow keep.




          PRAIRIE DAWN


    A crimson fire that vanquishes the stars;
    A pungent odor from the dusty sage;
    A sudden stirring of the huddled herds;
    A breaking of the distant table-lands
    Through purple mists ascending, and the flare
    Of water-ditches silver in the light;
    A swift, bright lance hurled low across the world;
    A sudden sickness for the hills of home.




          AFTERMATH


    Canst thou conjure a vanished morn of spring,
      Or bid the ashes of the sunset glow
    Again to redness? Are we strong to wring
      From trodden grapes the juice drunk long ago?
    Can leafy longings stir in autumn’s blood,
      Or can I wear a pearl dissolved in wine,
    Or go a-Maying in a winter wood,
      Or paint with youth thy wasted cheek, or mine?
    What bloom, then, shall abide, since ours hath sped?
      Thou art more lost to me than they who dwell
    In Egypt’s sepulchres, long ages fled;
      And would I touch--Ah me! I might as well
    Covet the gold of Helen’s vanished head,
      Or kiss back Cleopatra from the dead!




          THOU ART THE PEARL


    I read of knights who laid their armour down,
        And left the tourney’s prize for other hands,
    And clad them in a pilgrim’s sober gown,
        To seek a holy cup in desert lands.
    For them no more the torch of victory;
        For them lone vigils and the starlight pale,
    So they in dreams the Blessed Cup may see--
        Thou art the Grail!

    An Eastern king once smelled a rose in sleep,
        And on the morrow laid his scepter down.
    His heir his titles and his lands might keep,--
        The rose was sweeter wearing than the crown.
    Nor cared he that its life was but an hour,
        A breath that from the crimson summer blows,
    Who gladly paid a kingdom for a flower--
        Thou art the Rose!

    A merchant man, who knew the worth of things,
        Beheld a pearl more priceless than a star;
    And straight returning, all he hath he brings
        And goes upon his way, ah, richer far!
    Laughter of merchants in the market-place,
        Nor taunting gibe nor scornful lips that curl,
    Can ever cloud the rapture on his face--
        Thou art the Pearl!




          ARCADIAN WINTER


    Woe is me to tell it thee,
    Winter winds in Arcady!
    Scattered is thy flock and fled
    From the glades where once it fed,
    And the snow lies drifted white
    In the bower of our delight,
    Where the beech threw gracious shade
    On the cheek of boy and maid:
    And the bitter blasts make roar
    Through the fleshless sycamore.

    White enchantment holds the spring,
    Where thou once wert wont to sing,
    And the cold hath cut to death
    Reeds melodious of thy breath.
    He, the rival of thy lyre,
    Nightingale with note of fire,
    Sings no more; but far away,
    From the windy hill-side gray,
    Calls the broken note forlorn
    Of an aged shepherd’s horn.

    Still about the fire they tell
    How it long ago befell
    That a shepherd maid and lad
    Met and trembled and were glad;
    When the swift spring waters ran,
    And the wind to boy or man
    Brought the aching of his sires--
    Song and love and all desires.
    Ere the starry dogwoods fell
    They were lovers, so they tell.

    Woe is me to tell it thee,
    Winter winds in Arcady!
    Broken pipes and vows forgot,
    Scattered flocks returning not,
    Frozen brook and drifted hill,
    Ashen sun and song-birds still;
    Songs of summer and desire
    Crooned about the winter fire;
    Shepherd lads with silver hair,
    Shepherd maids no longer fair.




          PROVENÇAL LEGEND


    On his little grave and wild,
    Faustinus, the martyr child,
      Candytuft and mustards grow.
    Ah, how many a June has smiled
      On the turf he lies below.

    Ages gone they laid him there,
    Quit of sun and wholesome air,
      Broken flesh and tortured limb;
    Leaving all his faith the heir
      Of his gentle hope and him.

    Yonder, under pagan skies,
    Bleached by rains, the circus lies,
      Where they brought him from his play.
    Comeliest his of sacrifice,
      Youth and tender April day.

    “Art thou not the shepherd’s son?--
    There the hills thy lambkins run?--
      These the fields thy brethren keep?”
    “On a higher hill than yon
      Doth my Father lead His sheep.”

    “Bring thy ransom, then,” they say,
    “Gold enough to pave the way
      From the temple to the Rhone.”
    When he came, upon his day,
      Slender, tremulous, alone,

    Mustard flowers like these he pressed,
    Golden, flame-like, to his breast,
      Blooms the early weanlings eat.
    When his Triumph brought him rest,
      Yellow bloom lay at his feet.

    Golden play-days came: the air
    Called him, weanlings bleated there,
      Roman boys ran fleet with spring;
    Shorn of youth and usage fair,
      Hope nor hill-top days they bring.

    But the shepherd children still
    Come at Easter, warm or chill,
      Come with violets gathered wild
    From his sloping pasture hill,
    Play-fellows who would fulfill
      Play-time to that martyr child.




          THE ENCORE


    No garlands in the winter-time,
        No trumpets in the night!
    The song ye praise was done lang syne,
        And was its own delight.
    O’ God’s name take the wreath away,
        Since now the music’s sped;
    Ye never cry, “Long live the king!”
        Until the king is dead.

    When I came piping through the land,
        One morning in the spring,
    With cockle-burrs upon my coat,
        ’Twas then I was a king:
    A mullein sceptre in my hand,
        My order daisies three,
    With song’s first freshness on my lips--
        And then ye pitied me!




          SONG


    Troubadour, when you were gay,
    You wooed with rose and roundelay,
    Singing harp-strings, sweet as May.
    From beneath the crown of bay
    Fell the wild, abundant hair.
    Scent of cherry bloom and pear
    With you from the south did fare,
    Buds of myrtle for your wear.
    Soft as summer stars thine eyes,
    Planets pale in violet skies;
    Summer wind that sings and dies
    Was the music of thy sighs.

    Troubadour, one winter’s night,
    When the pasture-lands were white
    And the cruel stars were bright,
    Fortune held thee in despite.
    Then beneath my tower you bore
    Rose nor rondel as of yore,
    But a heavy grief and sore
    Laid in silence at my door.
    April yearneth, April goes;
    Not for me her violet blows,
    I have done for long with those.
    At my breast thy sorrow grows,
    Nearer to my heart, God knows,
    Than ever roundelay or rose!




          L’ENVOI


    Where are the loves that we have loved before
    When once we are alone, and shut the door?
    No matter whose the arms that held me fast,
    The arms of Darkness hold me at the last.
    No matter down what primrose path I tend,
    I kiss the lips of Silence in the end.
    No matter on what heart I found delight,
    I come again unto the breast of Night.
    No matter when or how love did befall,
    ’Tis Loneliness that loves me best of all,
    And in the end she claims me, and I know
    That she will stay, though all the rest may go.
    No matter whose the eyes that I would keep
    Near in the dark, ’tis in the eyes of Sleep
    That I must look and look forever more,
    When once I am alone, and shut the door.




          PART II




          THE PALATINE

       (IN THE “DARK AGES”)


    “Have you been with the King to Rome,
            Brother, big brother?”
    “I’ve been there and I’ve come home.
            Back to your play, little brother.”

    “Oh, how high is Caesar’s house,
            Brother, big brother?”
    “Goats about the doorways browse:
    Night hawks nest in the burnt roof-tree,
    Home of the wild bird and home of the bee.
    A thousand chambers of marble lie
    Wide to the sun and the wind and the sky.
    Poppies we find amongst our wheat
    Grow on Caesar’s banquet seat.
    Cattle crop and neatherds drowse
    On the floors of Caesar’s house.”

    “But what has become of Caesar’s gold,
            Brother, big brother?”
    “The times are bad and the world is old--
    Who knows the where of the Caesars’ gold?
    Night comes black on the Caesars’ hill;
    The wells are deep and the tales are ill.
    Fire-flies gleam in the damp and mould,--
    All that is left of the Caesars’ gold.
            Back to your play, little brother.”

    “What has become of the Caesars’ men,
            Brother, big brother?”
    “Dogs in the kennel and wolf in the den
    Howl for the fate of the Caesars’ men.
    Slain in Asia, slain in Gaul,
    By Dacian border and Persian wall;
    Rhineland orchard and Danube fen
    Fatten their roots on Caesar’s men.”

    “Why is the world so sad and wide,
            Brother, big brother?”
    “Saxon boys by their fields that bide
    Need not know if the world is wide.
    Climb no mountain but Shire-end Hill,
    Cross no water but goes to mill;
    Ox in the stable and cow in the byre,
    Smell of the wood smoke and sleep by the fire;
    Sun-up in seed-time--a likely lad
    Hurts not his head that the world is sad.
            Back to your play, little brother.”




          THE GAUL IN THE CAPITOL


    The murmur of old, old water,
      The yellow of old, old stone,
    The fountain that sings through the silence,
      The river-god, dreaming alone;
    The Antonine booted and mounted
      In his sun-lit, hill-top place,
    The Julians, gigantic in armour,
      The low-browed Claudian race.

    The wolf and the twin boys she suckled,
      And the powerful breed they bred;
    Caesars of duplicate empires,
      All under one roof-stead.
    Fronting these fronts triumphant,
      Conquest on conquest pressed
    By these marching, arrogant masters,
      Who could have hoped for the West?

    At the feet of his multiple victors,
      Beaten and dazed and dumb,
    One, from the wild new races,
      Clay of the kings to come.
    Hail, in the halls of the Caesars!
      Hail, from the thrones oversea!
    Sheath of the sword-like vigour,
      Sap of the kings to be!




          A LIKENESS

       (PORTRAIT BUST OF AN UNKNOWN, CAPITOL, ROME)


    In every line a supple beauty--
        The restless head a little bent--
    Disgust of pleasure, scorn of duty,
        The unseeing eyes of discontent.
    I often come to sit beside him,
        This youth who passed and left no trace
    Of good or ill that did betide him,
        Save the disdain upon his face.

    The hope of all his House, the brother
        Adored, the golden-hearted son,
    Whom Fortune pampered like a mother;
        And then--a shadow on the sun.
    Whether he followed Caesar’s trumpet,
        Or chanced the riskier game at home
    To find how favour played the strumpet
        In fickle politics at Rome;

    Whether he dreamed a dream in Asia
        He never could forget by day,
    Or gave his youth to some Aspasia,
        Or gamed his heritage away--
    Once lost, across the Empire’s border
        This man would seek his peace in vain;
    His look arraigns a social order
        Somehow entrammelled with his pain.

    “The dice of gods are always loaded”;
        One gambler, arrogant as they,
    Fierce, and by fierce injustice goaded,
        Left both his hazard and the play.
    Incapable of compromises,
        Unable to forgive or spare,
    The strange awarding of the prizes
        He had no fortitude to bear.

    Tricked by the forms of things material,--
        The solid-seeming arch and stone,
    The noise of war, the pomp Imperial,
        The heights and depths about a throne--
    He missed, among the shapes diurnal,
        The old, deep-travelled road from pain,
    The thoughts of men, which are eternal,
        In which, eternal, men remain.

    _Ritratto D’ignoto_; defying
        Things unsubstantial as a dream--
    An empire, long in ashes lying--
        His face still set against the stream--
    Yes, so he looked, that gifted brother
        I loved, who passed and left no trace,
    Not even--luckier than this other--
        His sorrow in a marble face.




          THE SWEDISH MOTHER

            (NEBRASKA)


    _“You shall hear the tale again--_
        _Hush, my red-haired daughter.”_
    _Brightly burned the sunset gold_
        _On the black pond water._

    _Red the pasture ridges gleamed_
        _Where the sun was sinking._
    _Slow the windmill rasped and wheezed_
        _Where the herd was drinking._

    _On the kitchen doorstep low_
        _Sat a Swedish mother;_
    _In her arms one baby slept,_
        _By her sat another._

    “All time, ’way back in old countree,
    Your grandpa, he been good to me.
    Your grandpa, he been young man, too,
    And I been yust li’l’ girl, like you.
    All time in spring, when evening come,
    We go bring sheep an’ li’l’ lambs home.
    We go big field, ’way up on hill,
    Ten times high like our windmill.
    One time your grandpa leave me wait
    While he call sheep down. By de gate
    I sit still till night come dark;
    Rabbits run an’ strange dogs bark,
    Old owl hoot, an’ your modder cry,
    She been so ’fraid big bear come by.
    Last, ’way off, she hear de sheep,
    Li’l’ bells ring and li’l’ lambs bleat.
    Then all sheep come over de hills,
    Big white dust, an’ old dog Nils.
    Then come grandpa, in his arm
    Li’l’ sick lamb dat somet’ing harm.
    He so young then, big and strong,
    Pick li’l’ girl up, take her ’long,--
    Poor li’l’ tired girl, yust like you,--
    Lift her up an’ take her too.
    Hold her tight an’ carry her far,--
    ’Ain’t no light but yust one star.
    Sheep go ‘bah-h,’ an’ road so steep;
    Li’l’ girl she go fast asleep.”

    _Every night the red-haired child_
        _Begs to hear the story,_
    _When the pasture ridges burn_
        _With the sunset glory._

    _She can never understand,_
        _Since the tale ends gladly,_
    _Why her mother, telling it,_
        _Always smiles so sadly._

    _Wonderingly she looks away_
        _Where her mother’s gazing;_
    _Only sees the drifting herd,_
        _In the sunset grazing._




          SPANISH JOHNNY


    The old West, the old time,
        The old wind singing through
    The red, red grass a thousand miles,
        And, Spanish Johnny, you!
    He’d sit beside the water-ditch
        When all his herd was in,
    And never mind a child, but sing
        To his mandolin.

    The big stars, the blue night,
        The moon-enchanted plain:
    The olive man who never spoke,
        But sang the songs of Spain.
    His speech with men was wicked talk--
        To hear it was a sin;
    But those were golden things he said
        To his mandolin.

    The gold songs, the gold stars,
        The world so golden then:
    And the hand so tender to a child
        Had killed so many men.
    He died a hard death long ago
        Before the Road came in;
    The night before he swung, he sang
        To his mandolin.




          AUTUMN MELODY


    In the autumn days, the days of parting,
        Days that in a golden silence fall,
    When the air is quick with bird-wings starting,
        And the asters darken by the wall;

    Strong and sweet the wine of heaven is flowing,
        Bees and sun and sleep and golden dyes;
    Long forgot is budding-time and blowing,
        Sunk in honeyed sleep the garden lies.

    Spring and storm and summer midnight madness
        Dream within the grape but never wake;
    Bees and sun and sweetness,--oh, and sadness!
        Sun and sweet that reach the heart--and break.

    Ah, the pain at heart forever starting,
        Ah, the cup untasted that we spilled
    In the autumn days, the days of parting!
        Would our shades could drink it, and be stilled.




          PRAIRIE SPRING


    Evening and the flat land,
    Rich and somber and always silent;
    The miles of fresh-plowed soil,
    Heavy and black, full of strength and harshness;
    The growing wheat, the growing weeds,
    The toiling horses, the tired men;
    The long, empty roads,
    Sullen fires of sunset, fading,
    The eternal, unresponsive sky.
    Against all this, Youth,
    Flaming like the wild roses,
    Singing like the larks over the plowed fields,
    Flashing like a star out of the twilight;
    Youth with its insupportable sweetness,
    Its fierce necessity,
    Its sharp desire;
    Singing and singing,
    Out of the lips of silence,
    Out of the earthy dusk.




          MACON PRAIRIE

          (NEBRASKA)


    She held me for a night against her bosom,
    The aunt who died when I was yet a baby,
    The girl who scarcely lived to be a woman.
    Stricken, she left familiar earth behind her,
    Mortally ill, she braved the boisterous ocean,
    Dying, she crossed irrevocable rivers,
    Hailed the blue Lakes, and saw them fade forever,
    Hungry for distances;--her heart exulting
    That God had made so many seas and countries
    To break upon the eye and sweep behind her.
    From one whose love was tempered by discretion,
    From all the net of caution and convenience
    She snatched her high heart for the great adventure,
    Broke her bright bubble under far horizons,--
    Among the skirmishers that teased the future,
    Precursors of the grave slow-moving millions
    Already destined to the Westward-faring.

    They came, at last, to where the railway ended,
    The strange troop captained by a dying woman;
    The father, the old man of perfect silence,
    The mother, unresisting, broken-hearted,
    The gentle brother and his wife, both timid,
    Not knowing why they left their native hamlet;
    Going as in a dream, but ever going.

    In all the glory of an Indian summer,
    The lambent transmutations of October,
    They started with the great ox-teams from Hastings
    And trekked in a southwesterly direction,
    Boring directly toward the fiery sunset.
    Over the red grass prairies, shaggy-coated,
    Without a goal the caravan proceeded;
    Across the tablelands and rugged ridges,
    Through the coarse grasses which the oxen breasted,
    Blue-stem and bunch-grass, red as sea-marsh samphire.
    Always the similar, soft undulations
    Of the free-breathing earth in golden sunshine,
    The hardy wind, and dun hawks flying over
    Against the unstained firmament of heaven.

    In the front wagon, under the white cover,
    Stretched on her feather-bed and propped with pillows,
    Never dismayed by the rude oxen’s scrambling,
    The jolt of the tied wheel or brake or hold-back,
    She lay, the leader of the expedition;
    And with her burning eyes she took possession
    Of the red waste,--for hers, and theirs, forever.

    A wagon-top, rocking in seas of grasses,
    A camp-fire on a prairie chartless, trackless,
    A red spark under the dark tent of heaven.
    Surely, they said, by day she saw a vision,
    Though her exhausted strength could not impart it,--
    Her breathing hoarser than the tired cattle.

    When cold, bright stars the sunburnt days succeeded,
    She took me in her bed to sleep beside her,--
    A sturdy bunch of life, born on the ocean.
    Always she had the wagon cover lifted
    Before her face. The sleepless hours till daybreak
    She read the stars.

    “Plenty of time for sleep,” she said, “hereafter.”

    She pointed out the spot on Macon prairie,
    Telling my father that she wished to lie there.
    “And plant, one day, an apple orchard round me,
    In memory of woman’s first temptation,
    And man’s first cowardice.”
    That night, within her bosom,
    I slept.
                          Before the morning
    I cried because the breast was cold behind me.

    Now, when the sky blazes like blue enamel,
    Brilliant and hard over the blond cornfields,
    And through the autumn days our wind is blowing
    Like the creative breath of God Almighty--
    Then I rejoice that offended love demanded
    Such wide retreat, and such self-restitution;
    Forged an explorer’s will in a frail woman,
    Asked of her perfect faith and renunciation,
    Hardships and perils, prophecy and vision,
    The leadership of kin, and happy ending
    On the red rolling land of Macon prairie.




          STREET IN PACKINGTOWN

            (CHICAGO)


    In the gray dust before a frail gray shed,
    By a board fence obscenely chalked in red,
    A gray creek willow, left from country days,
    Flickers pallid in the haze.

    Beside the gutter of the unpaved street,
    Tin cans and broken glass about his feet,
    And a brown whisky bottle, singled out
    For play from prosier crockery strewn about,
    Twisting a shoestring noose, a Polack’s brat
    Joylessly torments a cat.

    His dress, some sister’s cast-off wear,
    Is rolled to leave his stomach bare.
    His arms and legs with scratches bleed;
    He twists the cat and pays no heed.
    He mauls her neither less nor more
    Because her claws have raked him sore.
    His eyes, faint-blue and moody, stare
    From under a pale shock of hair.
    Neither resentment nor surprise
    Lights the desert of those eyes--
    To hurt and to be hurt; he knows
    All he will know on earth, or need to know.

    But there, beneath his willow tree,
    His tribal, tutelary tree,
    The tortured cat across his knee,
    With hate, perhaps, a threat, maybe,
    Lithuania looks at me.




          A SILVER CUP


    In Venice,
    Under the Rialto bridge, one summer morning,
    In a mean shop I bought a silver goblet.
    It was a place of poor and sordid barter,
    A damp hole filled with rags and rusty kettles,
    Fire-tongs and broken grates and mended bellows,
    And common crockery, coarse in use and fashion.
    Everything spoke the desperate needs of body,
    The breaking up and sale of wretched shelters,
    The frail continuance even of hunger.
    Misery under all--and that so fleeting!
    The fight to fill the pots and pans soon over,
    And then this wretched litter left from living.

    The goblet
    Stood in a dusty window full of charcoal,
    The only bright, the only gracious object.
    Because my heart was full to overflowing,
    Because my day to weep had not come near me,
    Because the world was full of love, I bought it.
    From all the wreckage there I took no warning;--
    Those ugly things outlasting hearts and houses,
    And all the life that men build into houses.
    Out of the jaws of hunger toothed with iron,
    Into the sun exultantly I bore it.
    Then, in the brightness of the summer sunshine,
    I saw the loops and flourishes of letters,
    The scattered trace of some outworn inscription,--
    Six lines or more, rubbed flat into the silver,
    Dashes and strokes, like rain-marks in a snowdrift.
    Was it a prize, perhaps, or gift of friendship?
    Was its inscription hope, or recognition?
    Not heeding still, I bade my oarsman quicken,
    And once ashore, across the Square I hastened,
    Precipitate through the idlers and the pigeons,
    Behind the Clock Tower, to a cunning craftsman,
    There to exhort and urge the deft engraver,
    And crowd upon my cup another story;
    A name and promise in my memory singing.

    In Venice,
    Under the Rialto bridge, I bought you.
    Now you come back to me, such long years after,
    Your promise never kept, your hope defeated,
    Your legend now a thing for tears and laughter;--
    Though both your names are names of living people,
    Cut by the steady hand of that engraver
    While I stood over him and urged his deftness.
    He played the part; nor stopped to smile and tell me
    That for such words his art was too enduring.
    His living was to cut such stuff in silver!
    And now I have you, what to do, I wonder?
    The names, another smith can soon efface them,--
    But leave, so beautifully cut, the legend.
    Not from a poet’s book, but from the living
    Sad mouth of a young peasant boy, I took it;
    Four words, which mean that life is sweet together.

    In some dark junk-shop window I shall leave you,
    Some place of poor effects from broken houses,
    Where desperate women go to sell a saucepan
    And frightened men to buy a baby’s cradle.
    Here, in New York, a city full of exiles,
    Short marriages and early deaths and heart-breaks:
    In some such window, with the blue glass vases,
    The busts of Presidents in plaster, gilded,
    Pawned watches, and the rings and chains and bracelets
    Given for love and sold for utter anguish,
    There I shall leave you, a sole gracious object.

    And hope some blind, bright eye will one day spy you--
    Some boy with too much love and empty pockets
    May read with quickening pulse your brief inscription,
    Cut in his mother-language, half forgotten,
    Four words which mean that life is sweet together;
    Rush in and count his coins upon the table,
    (A cup his own as if his heart had made it!)
    And bear you off to one who hopes as he does.
    So, one day, may the wish, for you, be granted.
    They will not know, these two, the names you cover;
    Mine and another, razed by violence from you,
    Nor his, worn down by time, the first possessor’s--
    Who had his story, which you never told me.




          RECOGNITION


    The old volcanic mountains
    That slope up from the sea--
    They dream and dream a thousand years
    And watch what-is-to-be.

    What gladness shines upon them
    When, white as white sea-foam,
    To the old, old ports of Beauty
    A new sail comes home!




          GOING HOME

      (BURLINGTON ROUTE)


    How smoothly the trains run beyond the Missouri;
    Even in my sleep I know when I have crossed the river.
    The wheels turn as if they were glad to go;
    The sharp curves and windings left behind,
    The roadway wide open,
    (_The crooked straight_
    _And the rough places plain._)

    They run smoothly, they run softly, too.
    There is not noise enough to trouble the lightest sleeper.
    Nor jolting to wake the weary-hearted.
    I open my window and let the air blow in,
    The air of morning,
    That smells of grass and earth--
    Earth, the grain-giver.

    How smoothly the trains run beyond the Missouri;
    Even in my sleep I know when I have crossed the river.
    The wheels turn as if they were glad to go;
    They run like running water,
    Like Youth, running away ...
    They spin bright along the bright rails,
    Singing and humming,
    Singing and humming.
    They run remembering,
    They run rejoicing,
    As if they, too, were going home.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APRIL TWILIGHTS, AND OTHER POEMS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


