The Project Gutenberg eBook of You Ask Anybody
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: You Ask Anybody

Author: B. M. Bower

Release date: April 1, 2022 [eBook #67747]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Street & Smith Corporation

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU ASK ANYBODY ***

                           YOU ASK ANYBODY

                                  BY
                             B. M. BOWER

              Author of “Cow Country,” “The Quirt,” Etc.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the December 7, 1920 issue
of The Popular Magazine.]


    Tumultuous “Casey” Ryan had driven horses since he could
    stand on his toes, and as one of Nevada’s last
    stage-drivers speed was his middle name. Wherefore the
    ubiquitous Ford finally claimed him for its own—and so did
    The Widow at Lucky Lode Mine. A combination prolific of
    complications. You will be glad to continue Casey’s
    acquaintance in future numbers.

From Denver to Spokane, from El Paso to Butte, men talk of “Casey”
Ryan and smile as they speak his name. Bearded men with the flat tone
of age in their voices will suck pipes and cackle reminiscently while
they tell you of Casey’s tumultuous youth—time when he drove the
fastest six horses in Colorado to the stage line out from Cripple
Creek, and whooped past would-be holdups with a grin of derision on
his lips and bullets whining after him, and his passengers praying and
clinging white-knuckled to the seats.

Once a flat-chested, lank man climbed out at the stage station below
the mountain and met Casey coming off the box with whip and six reins
in his hand.

“Sa-ay! Next time that gang starts in to hold up the stage, by gosh,
you _stop_! I’d ruther be shot than pitched off into a cañon
som’eres.”

Casey paused and looked at him, and spat and grinned. “You’re here,
ain’t yuh?” he retorted finally. “You ain’t shot, and you ain’t laying
in no cañon. Any time a man gets shot outa Casey’s stage, it’ll be
because he jumps out and waits for the bullet to ketch up.”

The lank man snorted and reached under his coat tail for the solacing,
plug of chewing tobacco. “Why, hell, man, you come down around that
hairpin turn, up there, on two wheels!” he complained.

Casey grunted and turned away uninterested. “I’ve done it on one,” he
belittled the achievement. “The leaders wasn’t runnin’ good, to-day.
That nigh one’s tenderfooted. I gotta see about havin’ him shod before
the next trip.” He started off, then paused to fling reassurance over
his shoulder. “Don’t you never worry none about Casey’s driving. Casey
can _drive_. You ask anybody.”

Well, that was Casey’s youth. Part of it. The rest was made up of
reckless play, fighting for the sheer love of action, love that never
left a scar across his memory and friendships that laughed at him,
laughed with him, and endured to the end. Along the years behind him
he left a straggling procession of men, women, and events, that linked
themselves reminiscently in the memory of those who knew him.
“Remember the time Casey licked that Swede foreman up at Gold Gap?”
one would say. “Remember that little girl Casey sent back to her folks
in Vermont—and had to borrow the money to pay her fare, and then
borrow the money to play poker to win the money to pay back what he
borrowed in the first place? Borrowed a hundred dollars from Ed Blair,
and then borrowed another hundred off Ed the next day and boned Ed to
set into a game with him, and won the money off Ed to pay Ed back.
That’s Casey for yuh!”

As for the events, they were many and they had the Casey flavor, every
one of them. A few I should like to tell you, and I’m going to begin
with one which shows how Casey was born an optimist and never let life
get the better of him, no matter what new wallop it invented.

From the days when his daily drives were apt to be interrupted by
holdups—and once by a grizzly that rose up in front of his leaders on
a sharp turn and all but made an end of Casey and his record for
shaving death close and never drawing blood—Casey drifted from
mountain to desert, from desert to plain, blithely meeting hard luck
face to face and giving it good day as if it were a friend. That was
the remarkable trait which Casey possessed. Nothing downed him,
because he never seemed to know when he was whipped, but thought it
merely an incident of the game. Cheerfulness was in the bones of
him—though he had a temper as Irish as his name.

So, in time, it happened that Casey was driving stage from Pinnacle
down to Lund and making boast that his four horses could beat any
automobile that ever infested the trail. Infest was the word Casey
would have used often had he known the dictionary contained it. Having
been deprived of much knowledge of books, but having a facile
imagination and some creative ability, Casey invented words of his own
and applied them lavishly to all automobiles and, in particular and
emphatically, he applied the spiciest ones to Fords.

Put yourself in Casey’s place and sympathize with him. Imagine
yourself with a thirty-mile trip down a twisty, rough mountain road
built in the days when men hauled ore down the mountain on wagons
built to bump over rocks without damage to anything but human bones.
You never stopped for stage robbers or grizzlies in the past, and you
have your record as the hardest driver in the West to maintain. You
pop the lash over the heads of your leaders and go whooping down a
long, straight bit of road where you count on making time. And when
you are away halfway down and the four horses are at a gallop and you
are happy, around the turn below comes a Ford, rattling its various
joints, trying to make the hill in “high.”

More likely than not, the driver honks his horn at you to turn out—and
you are Casey Ryan, of whom men talk from El Paso to Butte, from
Denver to Spokane. Wouldn’t you writhe, and wouldn’t you swear, and
wouldn’t you hate the man who invented Fords? Yet you would turn out.
You would have to, unless the Ford did—and Fords don’t. A Ford will
send a twin-six swerving to the rocky rim of a road, and even Casey
Ryan must swing his leaders to the right in obedience to that raucous
challenge.

Casey had the patience of all optimists, and for a long while he had
contented himself with his vocabulary and the record he held of making
the thirty miles from Pinnacle to Lund in the same time a Ford would
make it. He did not, by the way, say what his stage cost him in
repairs, nor did he mention the fact that Lund and Pinnacle citizens
rode with him once and then never again, and that his passengers were
mostly strangers picked up at the railroad station at Lund because
they were tickled with the picturesque four-horses-and-Casey stage. He
had never killed anybody with his record, but he had almost.

Once Casey did not turn out. That morning he had been compelled to
stop and whip a heavy man who came up and berated him because the
heavy man’s wife had ridden from Pinnacle to Lund the day before, and
had fainted at the last turn, and had not revived in time to catch the
train for Salt Lake, which she had been anxious to catch; so anxious
that she had ridden down with Casey rather than take the narrow-gauge
train which carried ore and passengers and mail to Lund every day,
arriving when most convenient to the train crew.

Casey had managed to whip the husband, but the difference in weight
had given him the victory by a narrower margin than Casey liked.
Besides, the fight delayed him so that he started out ten minutes
late. He was reflecting upon the injustice of the case, and asking
himself if he, Casey, were to blame because a woman fainted
inconveniently and missed her train, and had answered emphatically
that he was not, and that he would like to have given her husband
another good punch, and would have given it, if he’d had the time—when
the Ford came chugging around the turn and honked at him
impertinently.

Casey popped his whip, yelled and charged straight down the road. He
would make that Ford turn out, or bust something. He would show them
that Casey was Casey Ryan. Wherefore Casey was presently extricating
his leaders from his wheelers, ten feet below the grade. On the road
above, the Ford stood still with one front fender cocked up rakishly
and a headlight smashed, mulishly balking while the driver cranked and
cranked and swore down at Casey, who squinted into the sun that he
might see the man he likewise cursed.

They were a long while there exchanging disagreeable opinions of one
another. When the leaders had veered to the edge of the grade at the
last second before the collision, and the wheelers had responded, the
left front wheel of the stage did something to the Ford. It would not
start, and Casey finally freed his four horses, mounted one and led
the others and so proceeded to Lund, as mad a little Irishman as Lund
ever beheld.

“That settles it,” he snorted when the town came into view in the flat
below. “They’ve pushed Casey off’n the grade for the first time and
the last time! What pushin’ and crowdin’ and squawkin’ is done from
now on, it’ll be Casey that’s doin’ it—mind what I’m telling yuh, now!
Faint? I’ll learn ’em what to faint over. They can’t hand it to Casey.
They never did and they never will. If it’s Fords goin’ to rule the
country from now on, and take the road away from the horses, you can
climb a tree if yuh like, and watch how Casey’ll drive the livin’ tar
outa one! Go ’em one better—that’s Casey Ryan, and you can go tell ’em
I said so. Hawnk! Wait till yuh hear the hawnkin’ Casey’ll be doin’!”

I tell you his horses knew the mind of Casey and all his fell purpose
by the time he rode into town and up to one of those ubiquitous “Ford
Agencies” that write their curly tailed blue lettering in one endless
chain from the high nose of Maine to the shoulder of Cape Flattery.

“Gimme one of them gol-darned blankety bing-bing Ford autymobils,”
he commanded the garage owner who came to meet Casey amicably, in his
shirt sleeves. “Here’s four horses I’ll trade yuh, with what’s left of
the harness. And up at White Ghost turn you’ll find a good wheel off
the stage, ’t I’ll make yuh a present of.” He slid down from the
sweaty back of his horse and stood bow-legged and determined before
the garage owner.

“Well—there ain’t much sale for horses, Casey, and I ain’t got a place
to keep ’em, nor anything to feed ’em. I’ll sell yuh a Ford.”

Casey glanced over his shoulder to make sure the horses were standing
quietly, dropped the bridle rein and advanced a step, his Irish eyes
fixed upon the face of the other.

“You _trade_,” he stated flatly.

The Ford man backed a little. “Sure, Casey. What yuh want for the
four, just as they stand?”

Casey did not trouble with triumph. He continued to forge straight at
his object. “Me? I want a Ford autymobil. I want you to put on the
biggest horn you got, so I c’n be heard from here to Pinnacle and back
in one hawnk. And run the damn thing out here and show me how it
works, and how often yuh gotta wind it and when. I’ve got my stage
line to take care of, and I’ve missed a run on account of being pushed
off’n the road. I’ll sign papers tonight when I get in. Show me the
biggest horn yuh got.”

Thus was the trade effected, with much speed and few preliminaries,
because the garage man knew Casey well, and had seen him in action
when his temper was up. He adjusted a secondhand horn he happened to
have; one of those terrific things warranted to lift a medium-sized
man off his feet at one hundred yards or money refunded. Casey tried
it out on himself, walking down the street several doors and standing
with his back turned while the garage man squawked at him.

“She’ll do,” he approved, coming back. “What’ll kink Casey’s backbone
oughta be good enough for anybody. Bring her out here and show me how
you run the darn thing. I’ve got a load of bohunk muckers to take up
to the Blackbird Mine. Meant to haul ’em up to-morrow morning, but I
guess I’ll take ’em this afternoon for practice.”

Naturally, the garage man was somewhat perturbed at the thought. The
road from Pinnacle to Lund was the kind that brings a sigh of relief
to many a seasoned driver after it has been safely driven. It is
narrow in spots, has steep pitches both ways, and in the thirty miles
there are sixteen sharp turns and others not so sharp.

“Better let me write you out some insurance on the car, Casey,” he
suggested, not half as jokingly as he tried to seem.

Casey turned and looked him in the eye. “Say! Never you mind about
insuring _this_ car. What you want to do is insure the cars I’m liable
to meet up with!”

The garage man said no more about insurance, but took Casey down the
cañon where the road was walled in on both sides by cliffs and was
fairly straight and level, and proceeded to give him a lesson in
driving. Casey made two round trips along that half mile of road,
killed the engine, and figured out for himself how to start it again.

“She’s tender bitted, and I do hate a horse that neckreins in
harness,” he criticized. “All right, Bill. I’ll put you down at the
garage and go gather up the bohunks and start. Better phone up to
Pinnacle that Casey’s on the road and it’s his road so long as he’s on
it. They’ll know what yuh mean.”

Pinnacle did know, and waited on the sidewalk that afforded a view of
the long hill where the road swung down around the head of the gulch
into town.

Much sooner than his most optimistic backers had a right to expect—for
there were bets laid on the outcome there in Pinnacle—a swirl of red
dust on the brow of the hill grew rapidly to a cloud. Like a desert
whirlwind it swept down the road, crossed the narrow bridge over the
deep cut at the head of the gulch, and rolled on down the steep
little, narrow street. Out of the whirlwind emerged the pugnacious
little nose of a new Ford, and behind the windshield Casey Ryan
grinned widely as he swung up to the post office and stopped with a
lurch that sent the insecure fourth bohunk in the tonneau hurtling
forward into the front. Casey threw up an elbow and caught the bohunk
in the collar button and held him from going through the windshield.
The others made haste to scramble out, until Casey stopped them with a
yell that froze them where they were.

“Hey! Stay right where y’are! I gotta deliver yuh up on the hill to
the Blackbird, in a minute.”

There were chatterings and gesticulation, and one who was not scared
out of all the English he knew protested that they would “Walk,
mister, if you _pleese_, mister!” Whereat the crowd slapped thighs and
laughed long and loud.

Thereafter Pinnacle and Lund had a new standard by which to measure
the courage of a man. Had he made the trip with Casey?

Casey did not like that. Freely enough he admitted that he was a hard
driver. He had always had the name of being the hardest driver in the
country, and he was proud of it. When a man started out to go
somewhere, he wasn’t much, in Casey’s opinion, if he did not
immediately proceed to get there. But he was a safe driver, he argued.

Casey had an accident now and then, and his tire expense was such as
to keep him up nights playing poker for money to support his stage.
You can’t whirl into town at a thirty-mile pace—which is fast driving
in Pinnacle, believe me—and stop with a flourish in twice the car’s
length without scouring more rubber off your tires than a capacity
load of passengers will pay for. Besides, your passengers generally
object.

In two weeks—perhaps it was less, though I want to be perfectly just
and give him a full two weeks if possible—Casey was back, afoot, and
standing bow-legged and nonchalant in the doorway of the Ford Agency
at Lund.

“Gimme another Ford autymobil,” he requested, grinning a little. “I
guess mebby I oughta take two or three, if you’ve got ’em to spare.
But I’m a little short, right now, Bill. I ain’t been gitting any good
poker, lately. I’ll make out with one for a while.”

Bill asked a question or two while he led Casey to the last arrival
from the factory. Casey explained.

“I had a bet on with a fellow up in Pinnacle, y’see. He bet me a
hundred dollars I couldn’t shave off another ten minutes on my run
down, and I bet I could. I’d a got his money, too. I had eight minutes
peeled off, and up here, at this last sharp turn, Jim Black and me
butted noses together. I pushed him on ahead of me for fifty rods,
Bill—and him a-yelling at me to quit—but something busted in the
insides of my car, I guess. She give a grunt and quit. All right, I’ll
take this one. Grease her up, Bill. I’ll eat a bite before I take her
out.”

You’ve no doubt suspected before now that not even poker, played
industriously o’ nights, could keep Casey’s head above the financial
waters that threatened to drown him and his Ford and his reputation.
Casey did not mind repair bills, so long as he achieved the speed he
wanted. But he did mind not being able to pay the repair bills when
they were presented to him. Whatever else were his faults, Casey Ryan
had always gone cheerfully into his pocket and paid what he owed. Now
he was haunted by a growing fear that an unlucky game or two would
send him under, and that he might not come up again.

He began seriously to think of selling his car and going back to
horses which, in spite of the high cost of feeding them, had paid
their way and his, and left him a pleasant jingle in his pockets. And
then he bumped hard into one of those queer little psychological facts
which men never take into account until it is too late.

Casey Ryan, who had driven horses since he could stand on his toes and
fling harness on their backs, could not go back to driving horses. The
speed fiend of progress had him by the neck. Horses were too slow for
Casey. Moreover, the thirty-mile stretch between Pinnacle and Lund was
too tame for him, too monotonous. He knew in the dark every twist in
the road, every sharp turn, and he could tell you offhand what every
sharp turn had cost him in the past month, either in repairs to his
own car or to the car that had unluckily met him without warning. For
Casey, I must tell you, forgot all about that ear-splitting klaxon at
his left elbow. He was always in too much of a hurry to blow it,
anyway, and by the time he reached a turn he was around it, and there
either was no car in the road or Casey had already scraped paint off
it or worse. So what was the use?

Far distances called Casey. In one day, he meditated, he could cover
more desert with his Ford than horses could travel in a week. An old,
half-buried passion stirred, lifted its head, and smiled at him
seductively. He would go away into the far distances and look for the
riches which Nature hides so miserly in her hills. A gold mine, or
perhaps silver or copper—what matter which mineral he found, so long
as it spelled wealth for him? Then he would buy a bigger car and a
faster car, and he would bore farther and farther into yonder. In his
past were tucked away months on end of tramping across deserts and up
mountain defiles, with a packed burro nipping patiently along in front
of him and this same, seductive passion for finding one of Nature’s
little hoards of mineral beckoning him over the next horizon. Burros
had been slow. While he hurtled down the road from Pinnacle to Lund
Casey pictured himself plodding through sand and sage and over malapi
and up dry cañons, hazing a burro before him.

“No, sir, the time for that is gone by. I could do in a week now what
it took me a month to do then. I could get into country a man’d hate
to tackle afoot, not knowing the water holes. I’ll git me a radiator
that don’t boil a tea kettle over a pitch fire, and load up with water
and grub and gas, and I’ll find something that’ll put me in the clear
the rest of my life. Couldn’t before, because I had to travel too
slow. But shucks! A Ford can go anywhere a mountain goat can go. You
ask anybody.”

So Casey sold his stage line and the good will that went with it, and
Pinnacle and Lund breathed long and deep and planned trips they had
refrained from taking heretofore, and wished Casey luck. Bill, the
garage man, laid a friendly hand on his shoulder and made a suggestion
so wise that not even Casey could shut his mind against it.

“You’re starting out where there won’t be no Bill handy to fix what
you bust,” he pointed out. “You wait over a day or two, Casey, and let
me show yuh a few things about that car. If you bust down on the
desert you’ll want to know what’s wrong, and how to fix it. It’s easy,
but you got to know where to look for the trouble.”

“Me? Say, Bill, I never had to go lookin’ for trouble,” Casey grinned.
“What do I need to learn how for?”

Nevertheless, he remained all of that day with Bill and crammed on
mechanics. He was amazed to discover how many and how different were
the ailments that might afflict an automobile. That he had
boldly—albeit unconsciously—driven a thing filled with timers,
high-tension plugs that may become fouled and fail to “spark,”
carburetors that could get out of adjustment, spark plugs that burned
out and had to be replaced, a transmission that absolutely _must_ have
grease or something happened, bearings that were prone to “burn out,”
if they went dry of oil, and a multitude of other mishaps that could
happen and did happen, if one did not watch out, would have filled
Casey with foreboding, if that were possible. Being an optimist to the
middle of his bones, he merely felt a growing pride in himself. He had
driven all this aggregation of potential grief, and he had driven with
impunity. Whenever anything had happened to his Ford autymobil,
Casey could trace the direct cause, and it had always come from the
outside instead of the inside, save that time when he had walked in
and got a new car without probing into the vitals of the other.

“I’d ruther have a horse down with glanders,” he admitted when Bill
finally washed the grease off his hands and forearms and rolled down
his sleeves. “But Casey Ryan’s game to try anything once, and most
things the second and third time. You ask anybody. Gimme all the
hootin’-annies that’s liable to wear out, Bill, and a load uh tires
and patches, and Casey’ll come back and hand yuh a diamond big as your
fist, some day. Casey Ryan’s goin’ out to see what he can see. If he
meets up with Miss Fortune, he’ll tame her, Bill. And this little Ford
autymobil is goin’ to eat outa my hand, this summer. I don’t give a
cuss if she does git sore and ram her spark plugs into her carburetor
now and ag’in. She’ll know who’s boss, Bill.”

Taking that point of view and keeping it, Casey managed very well.
Whenever anything went wrong that his vocabulary and a monkey wrench
could not mend, Casey sat down on the shadiest running board and
conned the Instruction Book which Bill handed him at the last minute.
Other times he treated the Ford exactly as he would treat a burro,
with satisfactory results.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Away out on the high mesas that are much like the desert below, except
that the nights are cool and the wind is not fanned out of a furnace,
Casey fought sand and brush and rocks and found a trail now and then
which he followed thankfully, and so came at last to a short range of
mountains whose name matched well their sinister stare. The Ghost
Mountains had always been reputed rich in mineral and malevolent in
their attitude toward man and beast. Even the Joshua trees stood afar
off and lifted grotesque arms defensively. But Casey was not easily
daunted, and eerie places held for him no meaning save the purely
material one. If he could find water and the rich vein of ore he
dreamed of, then Casey would be happy in spite of snakes, tarantulas,
and sinister stories of the place.

Water he found, not too far up a gulch. So he pitched his tent within
carrying distance from the spring, thanked the god of mechanics that
an automobile neither eats nor drinks when it does not work, and set
out to find his fortune.

Now this is not a story of Casey’s quest for gold. It’s a love story,
if you please. Until the lady entered Casey’s orbit there was no
logical reason for telling you, nor for stating that the Ford
autymobil played the part of Fate—and played erratically.

Casey knew there was a mining camp on the high slope of Furnace Butte.
He knew the name of the camp, which was Lucky Lode, and he knew the
foreman there—knew him from long ago in the days when Casey was what
he himself called wild. In reaching Ghost Mountains Casey had driven
for fifteen miles within plain sight of Lucky Lode. But gas is
precious when you are a hundred miles from a garage, and since
business did not take him there Casey did not drive up the five-mile
slope to the Lucky Lode just to shake hands with the foreman and swap
a yarn or two. Instead, he headed down on to the bleached, bleak oval
of Furnace Lake and forged across it straight as he could drive toward
Ghost Mountain.

But the next time Casey made the trip—needing supplies, powder, fuse,
caps, and so on—Fate took him by the ear and led him to the lady. This
is how Fate did it—and I will say it was an original idea.

Casey had a gallon sirup can in the car, which he used for extra oil
for the engine. Having an appetite for sour-dough biscuits and sirup,
he had also a gallon can of sirup in the car. It was a terrifically
hot day, and the wind that blew full against Casey’s left cheek as he
drove, burned where it struck. Casey was afraid he was running short
of water, and a Ford comes first, as every man knows, so that Casey
was parched pretty thoroughly, inside and out. Within a mile of the
lake he stopped, took an unsatisfying sip from his big canteen and
emptied the rest of the water into the radiator. Then he replenished
the oil in the motor generously, cranked and went bumping along down
the trail worn rough with the trucks from Lucky Lode.

For a little way he bumped along the trail, then the motor began to
labor and, although Casey pulled the gas lever down as far as it would
go, the car slowed and stopped dead in the road. It was after an hour
of fruitless monkey-wrenching and swearing and sweating that Casey
began to suspect something. He examined both cans, “hefted” them,
smelled and even tasted the one half empty, and decided that Ford
autymobils did not require two quarts of sirup at one dose. He
thought that a little sirup ought not make much difference, but half a
gallon was probably too much.

He put in more oil on top of the sirup, but he could not even move the
crank, much less “turn ’er over.” He did not know what to do. So long
as a man can wind the crank of a Ford he seems able to keep alive his
hopes. Casey could not crank, wherefore he knew himself beaten even
while he heaved and lifted and swore, and strained every muscle in his
back. He got so desperately wrathful that he lifted the car
perceptibly off its right front wheel with every heave, but he felt as
if he were trying to lift a bowlder.

It was past supper time at Lucky Lode when Casey arrived, staggering a
little with exhaustion both mental and physical. His eyes were
bloodshot with the hot wind, his face was purple from the same wind,
his lips were dry and rough. I cannot blame the men at Lucky Lode for
a sudden thirst when they saw him coming, and a hope that he still had
a little left. And when he told them that he had filled his engine
with sirup instead of oil, what would any one think?

Their unjust suspicions would not have worried Casey in the least, had
Lucky Lode not possessed a lady cook who was a lady. She was a widow
with two children, and she had the children with her and held herself
aloof from the men in a manner befitting a lady. Casey was hungry and
thirsty and tired and, as much as was possible to his nature,
disgusted with life in general. The widow gave him a smile of sympathy
which went straight to his heart; and hot biscuits and coffee and
beans cooked the way he liked them best. These went straight to ease
the gnawing emptiness of his stomach—and being a man who took his
emotions at their face value, he jumped to the conclusion that it was
the lady whose presence gave him the glow.

Casey stayed that night and the next day and the next at Lucky Lode.
The foreman helped him tow the sweetened car up the hill to the
machine shop where they could get at it, and Casey worked until night
trying to remove the dingbats from the hootin’-annies—otherwise the
pistons from the cylinders. The foreman showed him what to do, and
Casey did it, using a “double jack” and a lot of energy.

Before he left the Lucky Lode Casey knew exactly what sirup will do to
a Ford if applied internally, and the widow had promised to marry him
if he would stop drinking and smoking and swearing. Casey took the
drinking pledge quite cheerfully for her sake, since he had not been
drunk in ten years on account of having seen a big yellow snake with a
green head on the occasion of his last carouse. He promised to stop
smoking, glad that the widow neglected to mention chewing tobacco
which was his everyday comfort. As for the swearing, he told her he
would do his best, and that he would taste the oil hereafter before he
fed it to the Ford.

“But Casey, if you leave whisky alone you won’t need to taste the
oil,” the widow told him. Whereat Casey grinned feebly and explained
for the tenth time that he had not been drinking. She did not
contradict him. She seemed a wise woman, after a fashion.

Casey drove back to his camp at Ghost Mountain, happy and a little
scared. Why, after all these years of careless freedom he should
precipitate himself into matrimony with a woman he had known only
casually for two days, puzzled him a little.

“Well, a man gits to feelin’ like he wants to settle down when he’s
crowdin’ fifty,” he explained his recklessness to the Ford as it
hummed away over Furnace Lake which was flat as a floor and dry as a
bleached bone—and much the same color. “Any man feels the want of a
home as he gits older. And Casey’s the man that will try anything
once. You ask anybody.” He took out his pipe, looked at it, bethought
him of his promise and put it away again, substituting a chew of
tobacco as large as his cheek would hold without prying his mouth
open. “G’long, there! You got your belly full of oil—shake your feet
and show you’re alive!”

After that, Casey spent every Sunday at Lucky Lode. He liked the widow
better and better. Only he wished she would take it for granted that
when Casey Ryan made a promise, Casey Ryan would keep it. “I’ve got so
now I can bark a knuckle with m’single jack when I’m puttin’ down a
hole, and say, ‘Oh, dear!’ and let it go at that,” he boasted to her
on the second Sunday. “I’ll bet there ain’t another man in the State
of Nevada could do that.”

“Yes. But Casey, dear, if _only_ you will never touch another drop of
liquor. You’ll keep your promise, won’t you, dear boy?”

“Sure as hell I’ll keep my promise!” Casey assured her headily. It had
been close to twenty years since he had been called dear boy, at least
to his face. He had kissed the woman full on the lips before he saw
that a frown sat upon her forehead like a section of that ridgy
cardboard they wrap bottles in.

“Casey, you swore!”

“Swore? Me?”

“I only hope,” sighed the widow, “that your other promise won’t be
broken as easily as that one. Remember, Casey, I cannot and I will not
marry a drinking man!”

Casey looked at her dubiously.

“Oh, I’ve heard awful tales of you, Casey, dear! The boys talk at the
table, and they seem to think it’s awful funny to tell about your
fighting and drinking and playing cards for money. But I think it’s
perfectly awful. You must stop drinking, Casey, dear. I could never
forgive myself, if I set before my innocent little ones the example of
a husband who drank.”

“You won’t,” said Casey. “Not if you marry me, you won’t.” Then he
changed the subject, beginning to talk of his prospect over on Ghost
Mountain. The widow liked to hear him tell about finding a pocket of
ore that went seventy ounces in silver and one and seven-tenths ounces
in gold, and how he expected any day to get down into the main body of
ore and find it a “contact” vein. It all sounded very convincing and
as if Casey Ryan were in a fair way to become a rich man.

The next time Casey saw the widow he was on his way to town for more
powder, his whole box of “giant” having gone off with a tremendous
bang the night before in one of those abrupt hailstorms that come so
unexpectedly in the mountain country. Casey had worked until dark, and
was dog tired and had left the box standing uncovered beside the
dugout where he kept it. He suspected that a hailstone had played a
joke on him, but his chief emotion was one of self-congratulation
because he had prudently stored the dynamite around a shoulder of the
cañon where he camped.

When he told the widow about it, and pointed out how lucky he was, she
looked very grave. It was a very careless thing to do, she said. Casey
admitted that it was. A man who handled dynamite ought to shun liquor
above all things, she went on; and Casey agreed restively. He had not
felt any inclination to imbibe until that minute, when the Irish rose
up hotly within him.

“Casey, dear, are you _sure_ you have nothing in camp?”

Casey assured her solemnly that he had not, and drove off down the
hill vaguely aware that he was not so content with life as he had
been. “Damn that sirup!” he exploded once, quite as abruptly as had
the giant powder. After that he chewed tobacco and drove in broody
silence.

Being Casey Ryan, tough as hickory and wont to drive headlong to his
destination, Casey did not remain in town to loiter a half day and
sleep a night and drive back the next day, as most desert dwellers
did. He hurried through with his business, filled up with gas and oil,
loaded on an extra can of each, strapped his box of dynamite upon the
seat beside him where he could keep an eye on it—just as if that would
do any good if the tricky stuff meant to blow up!—and started back at
three in the afternoon. He would be half the night getting to camp,
even though he was Casey Ryan and drove a wicked Ford. But he would be
there, ready to start to work at sunrise. A man who is going to marry
a widow with two children had best hurry up and strike every streak of
rich ore he has in his claim, thought Casey.

All that afternoon, though the wind blew hot in his face, Casey
drilled across the desert, meeting never a living thing, overtaking
none. All that afternoon a yellow dust cloud swirled rapidly along the
rough desert road, vainly trying to keep up with Casey who made it. In
Yucca Pass he had to stop and fill motor and radiator with oil and
water, and just as he topped the summit a front tire popped like a
pistol.

Casey killed the engine and got out stiffly, bit off a chew of
tobacco, and gazed pensively at Furnace Mountain that held Lucky Lode,
where the widow was cooking supper at that moment.

“I sure would like to flop m’ lip over one of her biscuits, right
now,” he said aloud. “If I do strike it, I wonder will she git too
high-toned to cook?”

His eyes went to Furnace Lake lying smooth and pale yellow in the
saucerlike basin between Furnace and Ghost Mountains. In the soft
light of the afterglow it seemed to smile at him with a glint of
malice like the treacherous thing it was. For Furnace Lake is
treacherous. The big earthquake—America knows only one big earthquake,
that which rocked San Francisco so disastrously—had split Furnace Lake
halfway across, leaving an ugly crevice ten feet wide at the narrowest
point and eighty feet deep, men said. Time and the passing storms had
partly filled the gash, but it was there, ugly, ominous, a warning to
all men to trust the lake not at all. Little cracks radiated from the
big gash here and there, and the cattle men rode often that way, and
sometimes not often enough to save their cattle from falling in.

By day the lake shimmered deceptively with mirage that painted it blue
with the likeness of water. Then a lone clump of greasewood stood up
tall and proclaimed itself a ship lying idle on a glassy expanse of
water so blue, so cool, so clear that one cannot wonder that thirsty
travelers go mad sometimes with the false lure of it.

Just now the lake looked exactly like any lake at dusk, and Casey’s
thoughts went beyond, to his claim on Ghost Mountain. Being tired and
hungry, he pictured wistfully a cabin there, and a light in the window
when he went chucking up the long mesa in the dark, and the widow
there with hot coffee and supper waiting for him. Just as soon as he
struck “shipping values,” that picture would be real, said Casey to
himself, and opened his tool box and set to work changing the tire. By
the time he had finished it was dark, and Casey had yet a long forty
miles between himself and his sour-dough can. He cranked the engine,
switched on the electric headlights, and went tearing down the long
incline to the lake.

“She c’n see the lights, and she’ll know I ain’t hangin’ out in town
lappin’ up whisky,” he told himself as he drove. “She’ll know it’s
Casey Ryan comin’ home—know it the way them lights are slippin’ over
the country. Ain’t another man on the desert can put a car over the
trail like this.”

Pleased with himself and the reputation he had made, urged by hunger
and the desire to make good on his claim, so that he might have the
little home he instinctively craved, Casey pulled the gas lever down
another eighth of an inch—when he was already using more than he
should—and nearly bounced his dynamite off the seat when he lurched
over a sandy hummock and down onto the smooth floor of the lake.

It was five miles across that lake from rim to rim, taking a straight
line, as Casey did, well above the crevice. In all that distance there
is not a stick, nor a stone, nor a bush to mark the way. Not even a
trail, since Casey was the only man who traveled it, and Casey never
made tracks twice in the same place, but drove down upon it, picked
himself a landmark on the opposite side, and steered for it exactly as
one steers a boat. The marks he left behind him were no more than
pencil marks drawn upon a sheet of yellow paper. Unless the lake was
wet with one of those sporadic desert rains, you couldn’t make any
impression on the cementlike surface. If the lake was wet you stuck
where you were. Wherefore Casey plunged out upon five miles of blank,
baked clay with neither road, chart, nor compass to guide him. It was
the first time he had ever crossed at night, and a blanket of thin,
high clouds hid the stars.

The little handful of engine roared beautifully and shook the car with
the vibration. Casey heaved a sigh of weariness mingled with content
that the way was smooth and he need not look for chuck holes for a few
minutes, at any rate. He settled back, and his fingers relaxed on the
wheel.

Suddenly he leaned forward, stared hard, leaned out and stared,
listened with an ear turned toward the engine. He turned and looked
behind, then stared ahead again.

“By _gosh_ I bet both hubs is busted,” he said under his
breath—Furnace Lake impresses one to silence, somehow. “She’s runnin’
like a wolf—but she ain’t "_goin’_.”

He waited for a minute longer, trifling with the gas, staring and
listening. The car was shaking with the throb of the motor, but there
was no forward lunge, nothing whatever but vibration of the engine.
“Set-tin’ here burnin’ gas like a ’lection bonfire—she sure would
think I’m drunk if she knew about it,” Casey muttered, and straddled
over the side of the car to the running board.

“I wish—to—_hell_, I hadn’t promised her not to cuss,” he gritted, and
with one hand still on the wheel, Casey shut off the gas and stepped
down. He stepped down upon a surface sliding beneath him at the rate
of close to forty miles an hour. The Ford went on, spinning away from
him in a wide circle, since Casey had unconsciously turned the wheel
to the left as he let go. The impact of meeting that hard clay stunned
him just at first, and he rolled over a couple of times before he
began to regain his senses.

He lifted himself groggily to his knees and looked for the car, saw it
bearing down upon him from the direction whence he had come. Before he
had time to wonder much at the phenomenon it was upon him, over him
with a lurch, and gone again.

Casey was tough, and he never knew when he was whipped. He crawled up
to his knees again, saw the same Ford coming at him with dimming
headlights from the same direction it had taken before, made a wild
clutch, was knocked down and run over again. You may not believe that,
but Casey had the bruises to prove it.

On the third round the Ford had slowed to a walk, figuratively
speaking. Casey was pretty groggy, and he thought his back was broken,
but he was mad clear through. He caught the Ford by its fender, hung
on, clutching frantically for a better hold, was dragged a little
distance so, and then, its speed slackened to a gentle, forward roll,
he made shift to get aboard and give it the gas before the engine had
quite stopped. Which he told himself was lucky, because he couldn’t
have cranked the thing to save his life.

By sheer doggedness he drove on to camp, drank cold coffee left from
his early breakfast, and decided that the bite of a Ford, while it is
poisonous, is not necessarily fatal, unless it attacks one in a vital
spot.

Casey could not drill a hole, he could not swing a pick. For two days
he limped painfully and confined his activities to cooking his meals.
Frequently he would look at the Ford speculatively and shake his head.
There was something uncanny about it.

“She sure has got it in for me,” he mused. “You can’t blame her for
runnin’ off when I dropped the reins and stepped out. But that don’t
account for the way she come _at_ me, and the way she _got_ me every
circle she made. That’s human. It’s dog-gone human! I’ve cussed her a
lot, and I’ve done things to her—like that sirup I poured into her—and
dog-gone her, she’s been layin’ low and watchin’ her chance all this
while. That there car _knowed_!”

The third day after the attack Casey was still too sore to work, but
he managed to crank the Ford—eying it curiously the while, and with
respect, too—and started down the mesa and up over the ridge and on
down to the lake. He was still studying the matter, still wondering if
Fords can think. He wanted to tell the widow about it, and get her
opinion. The widow was a smart woman. A little touchy on the liquor
question, maybe, but smart. You ask anybody.

Lucky Lode greeted him with dropped jaws and wide-staring eyes, which
puzzled Casey until the foreman, grasping his shoulder—which made
Casey wince and break a promise—explained their astonishment.

They had, as Casey expected, seen his lights when he came off the
summit from Yucca Pass. By the speed they traveled Lucky Lode knew
that Casey and no other was at the steering wheel, even before he took
to the lake.

“And then,” said the foreman, “we saw your lights go round and round
in a circle, and disappear—”

“They didn’t,” Casey cut in trenchantly. “They went dim because I was
taking her slow, being about all in.”

The foreman grinned. “We thought you’d drove into the crevice, and we
went down with lanterns and hunted the full length of it. We never
found a sign of you or the car.”

“’Cause I was over in camp, or thereabout,” supplied Casey dryly. “I
wish you’d of come on over. I sure needed help.”

“We figured you was pretty well lit up, to circle around like that.
I’ve been down since, by daylight, and so have some of the boys,
looking into that crevice. But we gave it up, finally.”

Then Casey, because he liked a joke even when it was on himself, told
the foreman and his men what had happened to him. He did not
exaggerate the mishap; the truth was sufficiently wild. They whooped
with glee. Every one laughs at the unusual misfortunes of others, and
this was unusual. They stood around the Ford and talked to it, and
whooped again. “You sure must have had so-ome jag, Casey,” they told
him exuberantly.

“I was sober,” Casey testified sharply. “I’ll swear I hadn’t had a
drop of anything worse than lemon soda, and that was before I left
town.” Whereupon they whooped the louder, bent double, some of them,
with mirth.

“Say! If I was drunk that night I’d say so,” Casey exploded finally.
“What the hell—what’s the matter with you rabbits? You think Casey
Ryan has got to the point where he’s scared to tell what he done and
all he done? Lemme tell yuh, anything Casey does he ain’t afraid to
_tell_ about! Lyin’ is something I never was scared bad enough to do.
You ask anybody.”

“There’s the widow,” said the foreman, wiping his eyes.

Casey turned and looked, but the widow was not in sight. The foreman,
he judged, was speaking figuratively. He swung back glaring.

“You think I’m scared to tell her what happened? She’ll know I was
sober, if I say I was sober. She ain’t as big a fool——” He did not
want to fight, although he was aching to lick every man of them. For
one thing, he was too sore and lame, and then, the widow would not
like it.

With his back very straight, Casey walked down to the house and tried
to tell the widow. But the widow was a woman, and she was hurt because
Casey, since he was alive and not in the crevice, had not come
straight to comfort her, but had lingered up there talking and
laughing with the men. The widow had taken Casey’s part when the
others said he must have been drunk. She had maintained, red-lidded
and trembly of voice, that something had gone wrong with Casey’s car,
so that he couldn’t steer it. Such things happened, she knew.

Well, Casey told the widow the truth, and the widow’s face hardened
while she listened. She had kissed him when he came in, but now she
moved away from him. She did not call him dear boy, nor even Casey,
dear. She waited until he had reached the point that puzzled him, the
point of a Ford’s degree of intelligence. Then her lips thinned before
she opened them.

“And what,” she asked coldly, “had you been drinking, Mr. Ryan?”

“Me? One bottle of lemon soda before I left town, and I left town at
three o’clock in the afternoon. I swear—”

“You need not swear, Mr. Ryan.” The widow folded her hands and
regarded him sternly, though her voice was still politely soft. “After
I had told you repeatedly that my little ones should ever be guarded
from a drinking father; after you had solemnly promised me that you
would never again put glass to your lips, or swallow a drop of whisky;
after, that very morning, renewing your promise—”

“I was sober,” Casey said, his face a shade paler than usual, though
it was still quite frankly red. “I swear to Gawd I was sober.”

“You need not lie,” said the widow, “and add to your misdeeds. You
were drunk. No man in his senses would imagine what you imagined, or
do what you did. I wish you to understand, Mr. Ryan, that I shall not
marry you. I could not trust you out of my sight.”

“I—was—_sober_!” cried Casey, measuring his words. Very nearly
shouting them, in fact. The widow turned indifferently away and began
to stir something on the stove, and did not look at him.

Casey went out, climbed the hill to his Ford, cranked it, and went
larruping down the hill, out on the lake and, when he had traversed
half its length, turned and steered a straight course across it. Where
tracings of wheels described a wide circle he stopped and regarded
them soberly. Then he began to swear, at nothing in particular but
with a hearty enjoyment worthy a better pastime.

“Casey, you sure as hell have had one close call,” he remarked, when
he could think of nothing new nor devilish to say. “You mighta run
along, and run along, till you got _married_ to her. Whadda I want a
wife for, anyway? Sour-dough biscuits tastes pretty good, and Casey
sure can make ’em.” He got out his pipe, filled it, and crammed down
the tobacco, found a match, and leaned back smoking relishfully, one
leg thrown up over the wheel.

“A man’s best friend is his Ford. You ask anybody,” he grinned, and
blew a lot of smoke and gave the wheel an affectionate little twist.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU ASK ANYBODY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


