The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ten Kittens
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ten Kittens

Author: G. A. Puckett

Illustrator: Helen Walley

Release date: December 30, 2021 [eBook #67044]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Burton Publishing Company

Credits: Charlene Taylor, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN KITTENS ***

TEN KITTENS




  TEN KITTENS

  By
  G. A. PUCKETT

  Author of “Grant’s Old Star;” “The Story of
  David;” “Thoughts Along
  the Way.”

  Illustrated by
  HELEN WALLEY

  Kansas City, Missouri
  BURTON PUBLISHING COMPANY
  Publishers




  COPYRIGHTED 1919 BY
  Burton Publishing Company




To the children who are interested in the welfare of their pets, this
little volume is affectionately dedicated.




PREFACE.


The stories of the ten kittens told in this book are true to life.
They have been gathered from here and there over the country. All the
kittens have lived and played their little parts in the life history as
told in each chapter.

The purpose of this collection of stories is to create more interest
and love for kittens on the part of our boys and girls. If these
stories help someone to be kinder to little kittens, then the author’s
purpose will not have been in vain.

                                                                G. A. P.




[Illustration]




MACK.


The story of Mack begins in a Rescue League in Albany, New York, where
he was born. The story was very interesting to me as the lady who
owned Mack told me about him. I will try to tell you about the unusual
circumstances in this kitten’s life.

Mack was a Tiger Persian kitten but was afflicted with a disease called
mange when he was very small. His mother had a very bad case of the
mange, but instead of being cruelly treated, her mistress took her
to the Rescue League where she could be well cared for. While under
treatment in this League, which was a home for sick, afflicted and
homeless kittens, Mack was born. A short time after his birth he and
his brothers and sisters became afflicted with the disease of the
mother. When Mack was six weeks old the mother and all the kittens,
excepting Mack, were chloroformed, because of their awful condition
with the disease.

Mack was left an orphan kitten with no home but the quarters of the
Rescue League. One day a kind lady went to this League and from all the
kittens there she selected Mack to go and live in her home. This was
very kind of the lady because Mack needed a home. Let us not forget
this example when we see a homeless or hungry kitten. It would be easy
for many people to make kittens happy in this way.

The lady who took Mack had a little daughter who became attached to the
kitten and in a few weeks they were the best of friends. By the time
Mack was one year old he had learned many tricks and was very obedient.
When he wanted someone to open the door he would stand on his hind feet
and put both front feet around the door knob and try to open the door
or attract attention. It was a good thing that Mack learned to do this.
One night he was left in the kitchen to sleep. The little girl of the
home, Mack’s little mistress, was asleep in another room which opened
into the kitchen. About two o’clock that night the girl’s mother heard
Mack rattling the door knob and meowing with all his might. She knew
that something was wrong so she went to the kitchen to see why he was
calling so much. When she opened the door she saw that the kitchen was
on fire and the blaze had almost reached the door of the little girl’s
room, where Mack was calling for help. His fur was scorched a little
but he was not seriously burned. The mother said that five minutes
more and the blaze would have been beyond control and would have made
its way into the little girl’s bedroom. She feels that Mack saved her
daughter’s life by calling for her to open the door.

When the lady and her daughter moved from Albany, New York, to Chicago,
they did not leave Mack behind. He moved with them as one of the family
and lived for a long time in a boarding house in the big city. There
are so many kittens that do not get to travel over the country; neither
do they get to live in boarding houses. Almost any kitten is satisfied
to have a good place to sleep and plenty to eat. There is another thing
most kittens like, and that is kind treatment. They like to be petted
and loved as well as being cared for with home and food.

After leaving Chicago, Mack moved to Kansas City with his kind
mistress. For some time he lived in this city but at last he moved to
Maple Park, just east of the city on the Interurban line to Excelsior
Springs. It was there he lived and spent many happy days. Out there in
the open, away from the crowded streets of the big cities, Mack caught
grasshoppers as his favorite pastime in the fields. This he enjoyed
very much and it was also good exercise for him.

When the lady’s husband would sit down to read the evening paper in
the big Morris chair, Mack would always sleep on one of the arms of
the chair. At meal time he would sit in a high chair at the table and
eat just what was given to him. He would not offer to get on the table
nor bother anything in the kitchen. One day another kitten came into
the home to live but he was not so careful to keep out of the food not
intended for him. When he would try to get into anything or stand up
against the cabinet or table, Mack would box his ears and make him get
away. Mack had been trained from his baby days to keep off the table or
cabinet and to keep out of food which did not belong to him.

The years passed by in Mack’s life until he became a very old cat. He
never forgot his early training and the many little tricks which he had
been taught to do. Of course, his mistress thought more of him after he
saved the little girl from the fire but he always had a favorite place
in everything.

At the ripe old age of fourteen years Mack died. His life had been
useful and he had been kind and obedient through all the years. It
was a sad day in the home when Mack died. The whole family went to
his burial. He was buried at Maple Park in a little grave over which
many tears were shed. He was loved by all and had helped to make life
brighter with the life which he had lived. A beautiful and obedient cat
was laid to rest.




[Illustration]




SNOOKS.


Snooks was a very small kitten and lived in a preacher’s home. He was
well liked by the children in the home. One day one of the girls became
very ill and for weeks everyone had to be very quiet. The kitten liked
to be in the house and romp with the children but during those weeks
of sickness he had to stay outdoors. One day a young man called at the
house on an errand and as he turned to leave he noticed the kitten
asleep in a chair on the front porch. He told one of the children that
he would like to have the little ball of gray and blue and to his
surprise the little girl gave it to him.

The first ride the kitten ever had in an automobile was that afternoon
when the young man started home with the little gift. Kittens do not
like to ride as dogs do, so this kitten was afraid and had to be kept
from jumping out while the car was running.

The kitten soon made friends in the new home and was named Snooks. This
name was given him by his new mistress because a little pet chicken she
once had was named Snooks. He was trained in many ways during the early
months in this new home and could be trusted alone in the house for he
would not climb upon the table or bother anything.

Nearly all kittens are afraid of water but Snooks likes to get into it
and play by splashing it with his feet. He also likes to take a bath
for he will not offer to scratch or bite, but stands in the bathtub
while his mistress washes him.

Sometime during each day Snooks has a big romp from room to room. He
has learned to run fast and then jump on little rugs and slide on the
floor. Many times a day these rugs have to be straightened and put
back into place. On cold nights he is allowed to sleep in the house on
a little bed which is all his own. This he greatly enjoys, but little
does he realize that many poor kittens which have no homes have to
sleep out in the cold. Many times they go to bed on the cold ground and
their little ears freeze because they cannot keep warm.

One of the greatest delights of this kitten is to play with a little
rubber ball which was bought for him. He will chase it from room to
room, like playing with a mouse. He makes it roll by striking it with
his feet or jumping at it. One day the ball rolled under the pantry
door and the mistress heard Snooks meowing but did not go to see what
he wanted. Soon he came to the living room and meowed again and then
started back toward the kitchen still meowing. The mistress followed
and Snooks led her to the door of the pantry and looked under as much
as to say, “I have lost the little ball, will you get it for me?” She
opened the door and found the ball and the kitten went on playing
again perfectly satisfied.

On another day a Victrola was brought into the house where Snooks
lives and at first he was afraid of the music but soon showed signs of
interest. He would sit and listen and liked to watch the records go
’round and ’round. He would walk all around the machine smelling and
looking as though trying to find where the music and voices were coming
from.

At this writing Snooks, the little blue and gray kitten, is alive and
well. He lives in a college town but has never gone to college. He is
satisfied to eat three times a day and every day he plays with the
little ball which he enjoys so much. He is now about one year old and
is going to be a large cat when grown. Let us hope that he will always
have a good home and be well and playful.




[Illustration]




DUMP.


This is a very peculiar name for a kitten but kittens often have
peculiar names. Dump could not be called a beautiful kitten but his
good nature and playfulness made him attractive and likeable. His
mother must have thought him pretty for she petted him so much by
smoothing his fur with her tongue. I have not yet told you the color
of this kitten and I am sure you are wondering about it. You might say
he was very pretty. His fur was a bluish gray and white and his face
was white almost all over. He was just a common kitten but you know the
common kittens are smart and many times as good in disposition as the
thorough-breds.

Dump was very playful and would do many cute things. One thing that
he did and seemed to like most of all was playing hide and seek in the
house. He would get behind the door and wait for his little mistress to
come and then he would jump out at her as though he meant to frighten
her. Of course, she had jumped at him in the same way many times and in
this way had taught him the game of hide and seek.

One afternoon in the summer time the little girl thought of something
to do of which Dump had not thought. It was this. The girl had a nice
little kodak which her uncle had given her and she thought of taking
Dump’s picture. Not very many kittens are fortunate enough to have
their pictures taken. The little kitten had never posed for a picture
and of course thought it was great fun, that is, if he thought of it at
all. Anyway, they both went into the yard and the little girl placed
Dump on the gate post. He seemed to know the purpose of being placed
there for he sat still in the warm sun just like he was really posing
for the picture. It was a good picture, too, and the girl has the
little picture yet, although she is grown now and has a home of her own
and another kitten takes Dump’s place.

Dump always slept in the window during the summer between the screen
and curtains. He would always answer his little mistress with a little
meow when she called him. He knew when it was time for his meals as
his master worked down town in a meat shop and when he would go to the
house for his meals Dump would meet him at the door and beg for meat.

When the yard was mowed and the grass piled up in one big pile, the
kitten would run to it and hide himself from his little mistress. This
was great fun for both. They loved each other very much and where one
went around the yard or in the house the other was to be found, too.

Dump never cared to play with other kittens and would not be very
friendly. One of the neighbors had a big cat next door, but Dump would
never let him come through the yard fence if he saw him. He must
have been a little selfish but probably it was because he loved his
mistress more than other kittens.

Many times Dump would go to the woodshed and watch for mice. He nearly
always caught one and he loved to play with it for hours at a time
before eating it. One hot summer day he played too long and it cost him
his life for he became overheated and died in just a little while. The
little girl did everything she could for him but could not save his
life. Dump’s little body was buried back of the cave beside the graves
of two little bantam chickens and a little gold fish.




[Illustration]




MITCH.


Mitch was a beautiful Persian kitten and lived in Kansas City,
Missouri. City kittens do not have such large playgrounds as kittens on
the farm for many times they are kept in the house almost all the time.
There are many dangers for kittens outside in the big cities, too. Some
one may steal them and take them away from their homes or they may get
run over by the cars and big trucks.

A little girl whose name was Mitchell gave the kitten to the lady who
told me this story. The family called him Mitchie for awhile after
the name Mitchell. Some of them thought that name too long so they
shortened it to Mitch, and that became the name of this beautiful
Persian kitten.

The mistress kept a large fruit basket on the dining table and when
there was no fruit in it, Mitch used it for a bed. He learned to run
toward the table and with one jump he would land right in the basket.
Then he would curl up for a long nap and be perfectly satisfied for
hours. He always liked to get into boxes and when the dresser drawers
were left open he would get into them. It did not make much difference
to Mitch just what it was for he could feel contented in anything. One
day a member of the family brought something home in a paper sack and
taking the articles out, laid the sack on the bed. In a few minutes
Mitch was curled up in the sack, fast asleep.

The lady’s husband worked at night, or about half the night, and when
he came home about midnight, Mitch would always meet him at the head
of the stairs ready for a romp. He loved to play with the man’s watch
chain but one day it was a costly play. The watch was left on the
dresser with the chain hanging over the edge and Mitch decided to romp
with it a little while. Of course, he did not know the watch might
fall and break. In some way he got his claws fastened in the chain and
jerked the watch to the floor. Mitch did not mean to break the watch
but it cost about seven dollars to have it repaired. Mitch could not
repair the broken watch and he had no way of paying the debt except by
love and affection for his master.

Mitch was like Snooks (in the other story), he liked water and liked
to play in it. He was very careful about keeping clean and would go to
the lavatory and put his feet in the water and then wash his face. One
faucet in the bathtub leaked a little and Mitch found that he could get
a drink there. In some way he learned that he could strike the faucet
with his feet and turn on more water. One day some member of the family
had prepared a half tub of water for a bath and about the same time
Mitch decided that he wanted a drink. He went to the bath room and as
usual jumped right over into the tub, but this time he landed in all
the water. You should have seen him scramble to get out for he was
terribly frightened.

One day the lady and her husband moved away from the city to the farm
and of course Mitch went along and became a country kitten. I am sure
that he liked to be on the farm where he could get out into the big
outdoors and catch lots of mice. About a year passed and the family
moved back to the city, but Mitch was left on the farm with the family
who moved on the place. Evidently he did not like his new friends or
else decided to go back to the city for he disappeared one afternoon
and has not been heard of since. If you should see Mitch anywhere it
would be kind of you to tell him that the fruit basket is on the table
in the city waiting for him. His mistress, too, will be very glad to
hear from him or have him return to his former home.




[Illustration]




THOMAS.


Thomas is another very peculiar name for a kitten. He was a grocery-man
by trade, as he lived in a grocery store for seventeen years.

Like so many kittens, Thomas was a stray that came to the store in
search of food. The proprietors of the store, two brothers, were kind
to hungry and friendless kittens. They allowed this kitten to live in
the store, and not many days after he arrived they named him Thomas.
At night he slept in the basement of the store. He kept the store free
from mice, as he was a good mouser. He was well cared for, too, as he
had plenty to eat of everything that he liked which the store furnished.

Because of kind treatment and plenty to eat the kitten grew very
rapidly and made a large cat when fully grown. Many months before his
death he weighed thirteen or fourteen pounds and was always fat and
sleek. So many poor, wretched cats that have no home could be more like
Thomas if people would give them a home and treat them kindly. A kind
deed, though done for a kitten, is not thrown away.

Thomas had a favorite place to sit, which was on one of the counters
near the front window of the store. In this way he made many friends.
He was of a lovable disposition and kind to everyone. He could have
numbered these friends by the score as all the customers had a kind
word or pat for him. Many people would stop at the window and look at
him because he was so large and beautiful. His fur was gray and striped
and he made a very pretty ornament as well as a good advertisement for
the store.

The play ground for Thomas was in the basement of the store building.
He had many a romp there but one romp cost him his beautiful gray coat.
Near the basement stairs there was a large oil can or tank that had
a large top which could be removed when the tank was filled with oil.
One of the employees had left this top off and Thomas stepped into the
hole while walking across the tank. The tank of coal-oil did not make
a very good swimming pool nor bath tub. It was lucky for Thomas that
he got out alive. The oil caused all the fur to come off his body and
this left him without a coat. The only fur left was a little at the end
of his tail. Some one said that his smooth body looked like that of an
elephant. Thomas was ashamed of this condition and would not appear in
the main room of the store. His meals had to be taken to the basement
for him and even then he would not come into the light any more than
necessary. For three or four weeks he remained in the dark corners of
the basement until a new coat of fur was well started. The new coat was
even brighter and prettier than the old one so Thomas did not lose so
much after all.

One of the brothers of the store seemed to be more attached to Thomas
than the other. The cat noticed this and showed his appreciation in
many ways. When this brother would go to his meals Thomas would get on
the front counter and watch and wait for him to return. He could see up
the street for a whole block the way his kind master would return and
he would watch him all the way.

For seventeen years Thomas lived in the grocery store after being taken
in as a homeless kitten. The men who owned the store never regretted
that they had shown kindness to a dumb animal and furnished a home for
a cat that had many times repaid them for all the care and expense he
had been to them. Many new friends and acquaintances had been made
because of Thomas on the front counter. New customers had been added to
the already long list. The store contained no mice to disturb anything
and everyone seemed happy because Thomas was always happy. During all
those years he never spent more than two nights outside the store
building. He always attended to his own business and was satisfied to
stay at home and romp in the basement play ground. At last he died of
old age and for many weeks afterward people would look on the counter
for the old friend of former days. There were many regrets expressed
when the news went out that Thomas was dead. A life of good fellowship
and love had not been lived in vain.




[Illustration]




TIGER.


Perhaps you have read or heard of tramp kittens. Sometimes they are
called little beggars. No doubt you have seen such kittens along the
roads or on the streets. Sometimes they will go for miles in search of
food and home. In cities and towns they will go from house to house
or to the stores in search of scraps of food to eat. Many times these
kittens are afraid of boys and girls because they have been abused
and often driven away with rocks and clubs but they would like to be
treated kindly.

Tiger was one of these tramp kittens in his young days. He had been
cast out from his home as an undesirable kitten. Days and nights he
wandered around in the town in which he had been left but no one seemed
to care for a homeless kitten. Sometimes he was able to find enough to
eat but many nights he slept in an alley, cold and hungry.

One morning this tramp kitten was sitting on the back porch of a drug
store very hungry. His little body was wasting away. While sitting in
the warm sunshine on the porch he went to sleep but was soon awakened
by someone opening the back door. Instead of being kicked off the porch
with a warning not to return he was surprised to hear kind words and to
feel a warm hand stroking his dirty fur.

The kind words and tender strokes came from a young boy whose name was
Frank and whose father owned the store. In a few minutes Frank had a
little bed arranged by the stove in the store and the tramp kitten
was soon fast asleep. A little later he was awakened by Frank who had
brought scraps of meat from the meat shop and this the hungry kitten
enjoyed very much.

When Frank’s father came in that morning he was led back to the stove
where the kitten was sleeping and asked if it might live in the store.
The father consented and by noon the little boy and the little beggar
kitten had made friends for life.

“I am going to name him Tiger,” said Frank that evening as he was
telling his mother of the new found friend.

“Why name him Tiger, Frank?” asked his mother.

“Because he looks like a Tiger,” answered Frank. “His body has stripes
all over it just like the pictures of Tigers in my books.”

As the months rolled by Tiger became more and more at home in the
store. His little master fed him every day and soon he was fat and
sleek. He grew very fast and became the pet of the store force. He was
taught many tricks and it seemed that he always tried to do what he was
told.

By Frank’s continual training Tiger became a little circus performer.
Frank would clasp both hands and then hold out his arms in front of
him forming a circle through which Tiger would jump back and forth.

Another thing which attracted much attention from the employees and
customers was that Tiger would try to get into any kind of box left
open or set out for him. He never forgot this and after becoming a full
grown cat he would try to get into little boxes. Sometimes Frank or one
of the clerks would give him a small paste board box and tell him to
lie down in it. He would turn ’round and ’round in it until the sides
were mashed and then he would lie down on the flat piece of the box.
Sometimes they would give him a very small pill box and he would try to
get into it. He would walk all around it and at last would lie down on
top of it.

As the years went by Tiger became the pet of all who knew him. His
master grew to be a young man but the close friendship with the kitten
always existed. Tiger never failed to receive good meals and kind
treatment.

One evening while Tiger was lying in the alley one of the clerks
called him but he would not answer. The man almost had to whip him to
get him back into the store. This was very unusual. The clerk noticed
the changed attitude and spoke to others about it.

During the night the fire alarm was given and news soon spread that the
drug store was burning. Frank thought first of Tiger and of his desire
to remain outside the store that evening. The firemen arrived too late
to enter the building although it was not entirely destroyed. The next
day Tiger was found on top of the office desk near a rear window. He
had suffocated in the smoke but the flames had not touched his body.
Such was the end of life for the obedient and faithful Tiger.




[Illustration]




SAMMY.


It is very interesting to know why pets are called the same names as
people. Not only cats and dogs, but birds, horses, cows and other pets
are given the names of people. Many times these names are given because
of fondness for the pets and love for those after whom they are named.

The lady who told me this story of Sammy also told me why she called
him this name. She had met a very attractive young man while visiting
in another town and when she came home she did not forget the new
acquaintance. In a few days after she returned from the visit someone
gave her a little kitten which she named Sammy for him. She never
learned whether the young man felt honored because of this, but the
kitten was well cared for.

Sammy was a beautiful Maltese kitten but his young mistress did not
know where he was born nor anything about his mother, sisters nor
brothers. He seemed like an orphan kitten and was given the best of
care. In a little while he was satisfied in the new home and seemed to
be perfectly happy.

As the months rolled by, Sammy and his mistress became very fond
of each other. One day something happened which changed the course
of events. The young lady made another acquaintance--this time of
a young man who had gone into business in her home town. Sammy was
afraid of all strangers and would not play with any of the boys in
the neighborhood and would not make friends with any of the young men
who called on his mistress. When the nice looking business man began
visiting the young lady Sammy also became acquainted with him. From the
first visit he seemed to like the new acquaintance and soon they were
close friends. When the young man called at the home Sammy would always
meet him at the gate and accompany him to the door. When his mistress
would allow him to do so he would go into the house so that the young
man might pet him.

Sammy was never trained to catch mice and was never given one to eat.
It is often a good thing to have a cat that will catch mice, but
sometimes it proves very fatal as mice are often poisoned and thrown
out or die where the kittens can find them. Sammy was not allowed to
eat meat either, especially raw meat. Feeding raw meat has proven very
costly to many valuable cats as it has made them of vicious or cross
disposition. The mistress of Sammy was very careful to cultivate in him
a kind and obedient disposition.

In the yard of the home there was an old tree in which Sammy spent
many happy hours in the warm sunshine. Not many feet from the ground
the tree forked and this made a very desirable place to get out of the
reach of dogs and to rest or sleep. This had been a favorite resting
place for Trilby, a kitten that lived in the home long before Sammy
was born. The lady said that both kittens had used the old tree for a
resting place and that she had often regretted that she had not taken
their pictures. I am sorry, too, as I would like to have shown you the
picture of Sammy in this book, but we will have to imagine how peaceful
he was as he slept in the warm sunshine.

One beautiful autumn day in September, the young man whom Sammy loved
and who had been going to the home very often, went to take Sammy’s
mistress away. Sammy was pleased to have the young man there although
he did not understand why so many people were there and what it all
meant.

A few days after the couple were married they moved to a little cottage
in another part of town and took Sammy along to live with them. In this
new home he seemed perfectly satisfied and never tried to go back to
the old home again. He spent many happy days in this home and every
evening he would go down the street to meet his new master. The young
couple became very much attached to Sammy and gave him the best place
in almost everything. Have you ever heard of a spoiled kitten? Sammy
was like some children who are allowed to have their way for he became
a spoiled kitten later in life.

On another day, many months after the beautiful autumn wedding day,
a little baby came into the home to live. Sammy did not know what
to think of a baby crying and to see everyone making over the new
daughter. In those days he felt somewhat neglected as he was not petted
as much as usual but he soon became attached to the little one in the
crib. He seemed to love the baby as much as anyone else and at last he
became so jealous that he would try to protect her when anyone would
lift her from the crib. He would almost fight the young father or
mother to keep them away as he seemed to think that they should not
fondle her. He must have been afraid that they would hurt his little
playmate, although the baby never got to play with Sammy except to coo
at him from the crib. He became so cross and so jealous that he had to
be given away.

The father saw a man in town one day who lived in the country and he
told this man about Sammy and of how good he had been until he became
jealous of the baby. Sammy was given to this man and he went to live
on a farm. I have wondered how much he missed the baby but probably
the farm life attracted his attention so much that he did not grieve
very long over the change. He lived to be seven or eight years old and
proved to be a valuable cat on the farm. He never got to see his little
baby mistress again but after she grew older she was told of Sammy’s
fondness for her. She is now three or four years older than Sammy was
when he died but of course she can remember nothing about him except as
the parents have told her.

Sammy is buried on a farm not far from Liberty, Missouri, and those
who knew and loved him will never forget the story of his life.




[Illustration]




BETTY.


Betty is of the Persian breed of cats like Mitch and Mack in two other
stories of this book. She lives at Winnwood Lake, just east of Kansas
City, and has a good home and a kind mistress. She is of a loveable
disposition. Her father is the famous White Czar, of Kansas City, and
her mother is of good stock.

Betty has not traveled over the country like Mack in the other story
but she is satisfied to live in a comfortable home with her mistress.
She has no time for traveling anyway, because she has to be at home
with her family of kittens. I am not sure she is perfectly satisfied
though because three of her kittens are far from home today.

The day that Betty’s first babies were born was very gloomy and by
night a storm was gathering which broke from the clouds in all of its
fury later in the night. The trees were howling in the wind and the
thunder and lightning caused Betty and her mistress much fear. The lady
had gone to bed that night before the storm came on and Betty was in
the corner of the room with her new babies. When the noise of the storm
was heard, Betty ran to the bed but in a few seconds went back to the
box to be with the kittens. She kept this up, going back and forth,
for several minutes. At last the lady told her to bring the kittens to
the bed. It seemed that she knew what her mistress had said for she
went to the box in the corner three times, each time taking a kitten
to the bed. After three kittens had been placed on the bed, Betty took
a long breath and seemed almost exhausted by jumping back and forth so
many times. The lady told her that she had left one kitten in the box
so again she went to the corner, this time getting the fourth kitten.
After a second attempt she jumped upon the bed and then cuddled down to
sleep regardless of the raging storm. She had been used to sleeping on
the bed, but was not satisfied to sleep there that night and leave the
four kittens in the box in the corner of the room. This act of Betty’s
showed the mother love for her babies.

The four kittens grew to be beautiful pets. There were three brothers
and one sister in Betty’s family. One of the brothers was taken to
the state of Michigan, and one was sent to Abilene, Kansas. The third
brother, named Jack, went to France with a Captain and his wife during
the war. Only this one of the brothers went to war. It seems that it
would be right for Betty to have a blue star for Jack. The sister, Blue
Bell, is still at home with her mother. The father of Blue Bell and the
three brothers is Blue-Eyed Billy, another famous cat of Kansas City.

Blue Bell is not alone now because Betty has two more babies in the
home. The father of these two younger kittens is called John and he
seems to love them as much as Betty does. He will get into the box and
wash their faces just like the mother cat. Betty does not forget Blue
Bell as her first baby. She is almost two years old now, but Betty
washes her face and ears every day just like she did when Blue Bell was
a little kitten.

Betty is very fond of going down to the lake and catching craw-fish
for the kittens. She will sit near the water until a craw-fish comes
in sight near the edge and then with one grab she has it. She always
catches them by the back so they cannot pinch her with their sharp
pinchers.

Another of her favorite pastimes is gathering the eggs. Betty goes with
her mistress every morning and looks into all the nests. If she finds
eggs in the nests she will wait until her mistress takes them out. If
she looks into a nest and finds no eggs she goes on to the next. In
this way Betty helps her mistress every evening.

Betty always knows when Saturday comes because her mistress goes to
town on that day. Betty expects a treat of good meat on Saturday. When
the lady gets home from town Betty always goes to the hand bag and
smells for meat. If she finds none she will go back to her box and lie
down greatly disappointed. If she smells the meat then she sits upon
her hind feet begging for it and is not satisfied until she and the
kittens have the special Saturday treat.

When the lady goes to the mail box for mail Betty always desires to go
along. She climbs the post and looks into the box when her mistress
opens it but she has never learned to carry the mail to the house.

Betty still lives at Winnwood Lake and with the help of John she is
carefully rearing a family of three beautiful and obedient kittens.




[Illustration]




JIMMIE.


Jimmie was a drug store cat, following the same occupation as Tiger in
the story called Tiger. One of the clerks in the store found him in the
alley one morning while burning some old boxes. The kitten was poor and
hungry and seemed to be homeless and friendless. He was a stranger in
the neighborhood and no one ever came to the store to claim him. He was
lost and lonesome when picked up and seemed very glad to find a friend.
He was only a stray kitten and no one knew of his mother nor where he
was born. This seems sad but with Jimmie it gave him a distinguished
place later in life which I will tell you about in this story.

In a little while Jimmie was growing and happy in the new home. He had
made friends with all of the clerks in the store and especially with
the proprietor. They became devoted friends for life; even money could
not separate them as a large sum was offered for him but his master
loved him more than money.

Some of the clerks taught him to jump through hoops or through their
arms or over their feet. On one of the counters in the drug store there
was a large clock which became the resting place for Jimmie. When told
to go and get on the clock he would obey instantly and then look around
at those watching him as though he was proud of the feat. One day his
master took a picture of him as he sat on the clock and he seemed to
pose for it. The picture is now in the desk of the drug store although
Jimmie has been dead three years. When I asked Jimmie’s master for the
facts about this story he turned to the desk and showed me the picture.
While we were speaking of the kitten’s life a man came into the room
who used to know and love Jimmie. He was asked if he knew the picture
and when he looked at it he exclaimed, “that’s Jimmie!” This shows
how much he was loved and that he was well known. Like Thomas of the
grocery store in the other story Jimmie had scores of friends and is
remembered by many citizens in the town in which he lived.

During one of the cat shows in Convention Hall in Kansas City a few
years ago, Jimmie was also on exhibition. He attracted much attention
although he was not a thorough-bred and was only a stray. His fur
was striped like a tiger and in the show he received first prize as
the best tiger cat shown. He also won first prize as a stray, but to
receive the premium his master had to take three witnesses before a
notary public and make affidavit that Jimmie was found in the alley and
that no one knew of his birth or his pedigree. After receiving these
prizes Jimmie’s master thought more of him than ever. He attracted much
attention in his home town, too, when the news went out that Jimmie had
won first at tiger and stray. New friends went to the store to see him
and he, too, became a good advertisement for the store.

One day a physician’s wife from another town went into the drug store
and saw Jimmie sitting on the old clock. She soon made his acquaintance
and became attached to him. She was a lover of kittens and Jimmie so
large and beautiful seemed to her an ideal kitten. She asked all about
him, of his birth, pedigree, disposition and many other questions. When
told that he was only a stray picked up in the alley as a homeless
kitten she seemed to think more of him than ever. Perhaps she had been
kind to some homeless kitten sometime in the past and understood what
it meant to care for one that needed a friend. She was anxious to have
him as her own and let him live in her own home. I am sure that she
would have given him the best of care and that he would have had a good
home in which to spend his old age. In a few days the woman’s husband
was in the town and went to the store and offered twenty-five dollars
for Jimmie. The proprietor would not sell him for that, and then the
physician offered him fifty dollars, but Jimmie’s master said that
money could not buy him. Such was the love for a kitten that had been
so kind and obedient during the many years in the store.

About two weeks after the physician had offered the fifty dollars for
him, Jimmie in some way got hold of poison and died. He was nine years
old at the time of his death and left many friends who have greatly
missed him during these past three years.




[Illustration]




PETE.


To get the story of Pete I had to go to a large hotel and there I found
an old gentleman who had lost his wife by death about a year before and
who seemed lonely for her presence. He told all that he could about
Pete, but said, “if she were only here,” pointing to a picture on the
wall, “she could tell you a fine story of this kitten. She loved cats
as no one else on earth, I suppose,” he continued. “Such deeds are
not thrown away either, although I used to think many of them were
unnecessary.”

One morning, while the good wife was living, they lost their last
kitten and she had said that they would not try to raise or care for
any more. That same morning Pete arrived at the back door of the home
and begged for something to eat. He was invited inside and that
was all that was necessary to make friends between the lady and the
homeless kitten. Pete was not so young either at that time for he
seemed to be nearly two years old.

The gentleman said that there never was a cat that could fight like
Pete. He was not afraid of anything that walked and could whip any dog
that ever came into the yard. When he made up his mind that he did not
want any dog or certain cats around the house or yard it was then that
they had to leave. He would sometimes make up with a cat after giving
him a good flogging if the cat was willing to stay long enough to make
up. He was an awful fighter and yet he was of a good disposition around
the home. Of all the kittens this lady had and loved and cared for
there was none so loveable and of a better character than Pete. If it
had not been for his fighting nature he would have been an ideal cat in
every way. Perhaps the brave spirit he showed helped him to protect
himself from cruel dogs and mean cats.

For ten years Pete occupied the best chair in the home for his resting
place and bed. He had things his own way because he was loved by
all the members of the family. His food consisted of anything and
everything that money could buy. He lacked for nothing that would make
him contented and happy.

When baby kittens were born in the neighborhood Pete was always one of
the first visitors and took charge of the kittens along with the mother
cat. He would fight for the baby kittens and protect them with his own
life. No mother cat was afraid to leave her kittens in charge of Pete
because they all knew his daring spirit and courageous nature.

After the death of the kind mistress Pete missed her very much. He
missed her loving caresses and the good meals which she always provided
for him. Of course the other members of the family took good care of
him then, but the mistress of the home had been the one he had largely
depended upon. She would get up any time in the night and let him in if
he came to the door and called. If he was not in the house at supper
time a good meal would be placed back for him and then during the night
if he came to the door she would let him in and warm his supper for
him. All this he greatly missed although he was well taken care of.

Today he lives in a Boarding School for cats in the city of Chicago
and is visited once each week at least by a daughter of his former
mistress. This daughter loves Pete too and Pete loves her just as much.
When she goes to the boarding place to see him he will come to her and
put both front feet around her neck and try in every way to show his
affection. He is now about fourteen years old and weighs sixteen and
one half pounds. During March of this year (1919) the old gentleman
received a letter from his daughter in Chicago saying that Pete was
well and seemingly contented in the Boarding School. It costs two or
three dollars a week to keep him there but this kindness is due him
after such faithful service during all the years.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN KITTENS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


