The Project Gutenberg eBook of The gray brotherhood
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The gray brotherhood

Author: Henry Leverage

Release date: September 10, 2022 [eBook #68951]
                Most recently updated: October 19, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Story-Press Corporation

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAY BROTHERHOOD ***

The Gray Brotherhood

by Henry Leverage


    An exciting story of Chester Fay, underworld prince, and of one
    of his most daredevil exploits ... Henry Leverage at his best.


A gray taxi was threading the traffic of Fifth Avenue. Up through the
wealthiest street in the world the driver flashed with all the aplomb
of a professional “bucker” who knew the elastic limits of the
automobile laws.

Chester Fay leaned forward now and then and studied the hands which
shifted the lever at the street intersections like those of an American
Ace at the “stick” of a biplane.

“Good boy,” he exclaimed when the taxi came to a grinding halt before
the doorman of the Hotel Rockingham. “Good kid!” he added when he
extended the fare.

“I thank you,” said the driver of the gray taxi.

Fay paused at the marble steps of the Hotel Rockingham. The taxi turned
and darted southward.

Wheeling with a pucker of interest on his features, Fay strode through
an alley of palms and bronze vases and leaned over an onyx-topped desk
where stood a trim-looking clerk whose collar and tie indicated
prosperity in subordinate positions.

“Arthur Hilton?” Fay questioned.

“By appointment?”

“Yes. He phoned me at--” Fay glanced up to the gilt clock over the
clerk’s head. “Exactly twenty minutes ago!” he declared.

The page who responded to the pressure of a button led the way to a
private elevator, nodded to the pilot and closed the green-grilled door
when Fay stepped briskly inside the cage.

He was whisked to a silent stop on an upper floor. He stepped out and
faced a gray-haired English detective of the superior type, who had
been pacing an ornate hallway.

“Arthur Hilton?” said Fay.

“By Sir Arthur’s consent?”

“Certainly!”

“You may follow me,” drawled the Scotland Yard man.

Fay found himself in the foyer of a splendid suite. He waited, toying
with his cap, as the detective passed through a rift in the portiéres
which led in the general direction of Fifth Avenue. He was on the point
of coughing to attract attention when the curtains parted in
invitation.

                *       *       *       *       *

Sir Arthur Hilton stood by a long window with the white light of a
western sky reflected across his furrowed face like the reaching hand
of a specter.

“You’re Fay?” he said as the Scotland Yard man backed into the shadow
of an inner room.

“Yes. Chester Fay--Mr. George Mott, the reformer’s friend.”

“Good--good and bad! There’s the old Nick to pay. Putney Stephney of
Downing Street--a King’s greyhound--with thirty thousand pounds in
American banknotes, was found dead on top of a goods-train at
Poughkeepsie this morning.”

Fay pulled out a cigarette.

“Murdered!” declared Hilton with a rising voice. “Killed in cold blood
somewhere between the steamer dock at West Street and--and
Poughkeepsie.”

Fay dragged on the cigarette, thrust his hands into his pockets and
leaned forward. His eyes hardened slightly. They fastened within the
steady stare of Sir Arthur’s own.

“Facts are these,” resumed the British representative. “Stephney had
landed at the dock at ten-twenty last night. Was seen by two of the
steamship company’s detectives who were watching all embarking
passengers.”

“Was that the _Carpathia_?” asked Fay.

“Yes--the _Carpathia_! Stephney came down the gangplank, turned at the
customroom, went inside a telephone booth, came out and was observed
taking a gray taxi at the foot of the dock. That was the last seen of
him until the chief of the railroad detectives at Poughkeepsie found
his body on top of a goods-train. Skull was slightly crushed. Pockets
rifled. Portfolio, with banknotes and memoranda, missing.”

“Quick work!”

“Beastly quick!” shot back Hilton through rigid lips. “Beastly clever,
too!”

The British representative glanced toward the doorway before which the
portiéres draped. He strode to Fay’s side and leaned forward as his
fingers clutched the investigator’s left shoulder in the grip of a
bulldog.

“Stephney didn’t die from the crushed skull,” he said tersely. “That
accident came afterward. He was killed by an unknown method. He was
lured to death in the heart of civilization!”

“An unknown method?”

“Fact! Had the coroner of Poughkeepsie on the wire not an hour ago. A
surgeon from Plattsburg happened to assist at the autopsy. It was he
who detected the condition of the lungs. Also, Stephney’s face was
greenish-black.”

Fay backed away and allowed Sir Arthur’s hand to drop. His eyes glazed
with speculation. They hardened.

“You have other facts?” he asked.

“Little more! Stephney was last seen alive getting into a gray taxi
which disappeared soon afterward. He was headed for this hotel. I sat
up until three o’clock waiting for him.”

“Who else knew he was coming to New York?”

“The Washington Embassy.”

“Who knew it in London?”

“Downing Street.”

“Whom do you suspect?”

“American crooks.”

“Everybody blames them--for everything.”

Sir Arthur frowned. “I’ve given you the case--on account of Mr. Mott’s
interest in ex-convicts and the Gray Brotherhood.”

“Oh, I’ll take it. I’ll jump! I want all the facts you can allow me to
have.”

“I’ve given you everything. The body found at Poughkeepsie on top of
the goods-train was Stephney’s. There’s no doubt of that. He was first
identified by the tailor’s name in his pockets--Concre, of London, I
think. We’ve a solicitor up there who made a complete identification.”

“Did Stephney ever visit New York before?”

“Once, two years ago--just after the end of the war.”

“Would he know any women here?”

“Hardly! He was to come right to me!”

Fay moved a chair and lifted his cap. He turned at the portiéres. His
glance toward Arthur Hilton was one of understanding.

“You and Mr. Mott alone know that I am on this case?”

“It is locked with us!”

“I have carte blanche?”

“Up to ten thousand pounds.”

“Good-by!” said Fay, creasing his checked cap as he parted the curtains
and strode through the suite to the hallway of the hotel.

                *       *       *       *       *

He jabbed at a pearl button until the private elevator floated up to
him. He reached the street and turned toward the Avenue. He saw there a
gray taxi. A young man sat on the driver’s seat. He was moving
southward close by the right curb.

A swift sprint, a ducking lunge before the silver radiator of a
polished limousine, a hasty reach for the wind-shield of the taxi, and
a startled exclamation from the driver--these occurred within seven
seconds.

“I’m going downtown,” said Fay, settling back in the front seat and
staring boldly at the driver. “Don’t mind if I ride out here?”

“I certainly do! It’s against the company’s regulations.”

“Set the meter and drive on. I’ve really got something I want to say to
you.”

“Well, of all the nerve!”

“Certainly--certainly! I’ve always been interested in this new company
with the gray taxies and the paroled men who drive them. I’m a Western
newspaper man--come from Chicago. Suppose you tell me all about the
Gray Taxi Company. How many taxies are there? Who’s the originator?
How’s business? Do you cover the steamship docks?”

“Say! On the dead, you’ve got nerve. I’m going to call the first
traffic cop I meet. There’s one!”

Fay reached into his right-hand trouser pocket. His hand appeared with
a five-dollar bill between his fingers.

“I’ll bet you this you don’t,” he said, pressing the bill into the
driver’s lap. “Take it and buy a good dinner. There’s another coming to
you if you answer my questions.”

The driver clutched the steering-wheel with both hands as he brought
his knees together and pressed a leather toe upon the throttle. The
taxi leaped by the traffic cop, dodged a bus and roared on down the
Avenue until an open place was gained.

“Go slow,” said Fay. “Loaf along and let me get some dope for my
article. Who owns the Gray Taxi Company?”

“James Ponsardin.”

“Proprietor of the morning _Messenger_?”

“Sure! He owns the company.”

“How many taxies?”

“Fifty running now.”

“Who manages it?”

“A girl!”

“What?”

“Sure! Her name is Elsie De Groot. She’s making it pay, too.”

“That’s interesting.” Fay stared into the alert face of the driver at
the wheel. “Is she an ex-convict?”

“I never heard that said about her!”

“Loyal!” thought Chester Fay, shifting in his position. “You never
heard,” he repeated aloud. “That’s definite. Do you keep records of
passengers carried?”

“We make a report out at night. Miss Elsie gets them.”

“Do your taxies cover the steamship docks?”

“Sometimes--if there’s a call.”

Fay saw that he was in the presence of a very matter-of-fact young man
who was making his own way in the world.

“Mind taking me to the Southampton Line?” he asked.

The driver’s answer was to glance around the right-hand side of the
taxi, slow to a crawl, then swing the corner with both arms over the
wheel.

                *       *       *       *       *

Fay braced himself for five blocks of cobbled streets upon the surface
of which ragged children played ball and dodged death. He stepped down
from the taxi as it came to a gliding stop before the ornate entrance
to the great dock.

“Mind waiting?”

The driver glanced at the taxi-meter.

“You’ve paid me for a couple of hours.”

“Stay right here. Ill be back in ten minutes.”

Chester Fay found two English detectives covering the dock. With them
was a Secret Service operative of slight acquaintance.

“Hello!” he said, drawing this man to one side. “Say, Gardner,” he
whispered, “who would know down here what happened last night when the
_Carpathia’s_ passengers came down the planks? I want to trace a man
who took a Gray taxi. The man is--”

“Putney Steph--Stephney.”

“Yes.” Fay raised his brows. The matter was evidently out.

“Has he been found?”

Fay shook his head. He recalled that Sir Arthur Hilton had not given
instructions to make public the matter of the finding of the body on
the railroad train at Poughkeepsie.

“Not found yet, eh?” Gardner said. “Well, I did all I could. Come over
here. That’s right. Now we can talk. That British team are
listening-in.”

“What did you find?”

“Stephney came down the plank, showed his passports, went into a
slot-booth, lugged his bag and a leather case out toward the street and
there hailed a Gray taxi. That much is settled. The taxi was driven by
a chauffeur with reddish-brown hair. His nose was slightly turned up.
He had on a yellow coat and leather leggins. He’d been waiting around
the dock for over three hours.”

“Must have expected him!”

“Looks that way, Chester. He had plenty of fares offered him. You see,
them Gray taxies are all the fashion now. They’re gettin’ the
business.”

“You were here at the time the passenger arrived?”

“No. I got my information from old Harry, who watched the express
wagons and taxies. He’s positive about the red-haired chauffeur. Said
he was a bold trick!”

“He’s right. Good-by!”

Fay left the Government operative and darted for a telephone booth.
Into the slot of this he dropped a nickel and obtained, after a brief
wait, Mr. George Mott’s secretary.

“This is Chester Fay!” he said briskly. “Say, get about ten of the Gray
Brotherhood rounded up right away and cover these assignments. Got it?”
he added, drawing the door shut with caution. “Yes--yes! They’ll do.
Cover Poughkeepsie and a corpse found there this morning on top of a
New York Central freight-car. Cover the morgue. Have them see the Army
surgeon who made the autopsy on the lungs. Have them connect with the
coroner and the railroad detectives who found the body.”

Fay paused and mopped his brow with his sleeve. It was hot in the
booth.

“Yes, there’s more!” he snapped. “Cover James Ponsardin of the
_Messenger_. Put him to bed and get him up in the morning. Find him and
keep the boys tailing him till I call them off. That’s all ... no, send
Rake to the corner of the block where the Gray Taxi Company has its
garage. Tell him I’ll meet him there in fifteen minutes!”

                *       *       *       *       *

It was eleven minutes later when Fay requested the driver of the taxi
to deposit him on the northeastern corner of the block around which
Gray taxies to the number of a score or more were scattered. Fay handed
over a second bill with a polite bow.

“I’m going to visit your boss,” he said with a quick smile. “I’ll pump
her in private for that write-up of mine. It ought to go big in our
Western syndicate.”

The driver twisted his wrist and studied the time. He set the meter to
the off position. “Good-by!” he said, leaning over and releasing the
emergency brake. “I’m much obliged!”

Fay turned and stared into the broad Irish face of the ex-convict he
had expected to meet.

“Ah, Rake--on time!”

“Sure, Chester! I was just watchin’ you and that wild-looking driver.
They’re gettin’ all the high-class business.”

“Come on! Follow me and keep your eyes open. We’re going to look a
little lady over. Miss Elsie, the manager, is under suspicion.”

Fay led the way along the sidewalk and threaded his steps through a
group of young men outside the Gray Taxi Garage. He eyed each one for
possible red hair and turned-up nose. He entered the doorway, dodged a
fast-flying taxi which was coming out on second speed, then knocked
upon the ground glass of a door marked _Private--Keep Out--This Means
You!_

A slip of a girl answered the knock. She glanced from Fay’s face to the
peering countenance of Rake.

“Well?” she asked.

“I’m looking for a Miss Elsie De Groot,” said Fay, thrusting his foot
forward. “I’m a newspaper man. I--want to write her up for a Western
syndicate. It ought to bring some business.”

The girl toyed with a pencil which she jabbed like a bayonet into a
raven-hued turban. “I’ll see,” she said, turning and gliding through an
inner door.

Presently her elfin face gladdened the opening as Fay half advanced
into the outer office.

“Come in, please. Miss De Groot will see you.”

Chester Fay removed his cap, crushed it between his fingers and stepped
briskly forward. He paused before the edge of a rug. Across this rug
sat a girl. She swiveled in a businesslike chair and threw one neat
ankle over the other. She glanced impatiently upward.

“We’d like to see you alone,” Fay said as he noted a mop of reddish
hair and a freckled nose which seemed to be pressed up by an unseen
finger. “Alone,” he added, swinging upon the stenographer and jerking
his chin toward the door.

“Why, certainly!”

The girl slipped out and closed the door. Fay left Rake’s side and
moved up close to a littered desk which bore some resemblance to order.

“To be brief as time!” he said, drawing a card from his pocket. “To be
brief,” he whispered, replacing the card, “I want to know just why you
took a taxi at or about six o’clock last night, went down to the
Southampton Dock and waited for a passenger who wore a Silver
Greyhound--indicating that he was on British Government business,
urgent and pressing.”

The girl’s broad forehead whitened slightly. She recrossed her trim
ankles. She tapped the desk before her with polished nails. She reached
and adjusted a hairpin in her reddish knot, which added beauty to a
resolute, somewhat bold face.

“I don’t know what business that is of yours!” she said.

Fay frowned. “It’s the people’s business! It’s Charles Mott’s business.
Are you going to help me?”

“I never talk to strangers. You may be Mr. Mott’s representative. You
may be connected with the Gray Brotherhood. How do I know?”

“You know what happened to your fare last night?”

The girl swung in the chair and glanced at Rake. Her eyes opened to
brown pools of protest. She brought both feet down on the rug and rose
with her hand on the back of the chair.

“You both better go.”

“Just a minute. You know Putney Stephney?”

“Perhaps I do.”

“You know what happened to him?”

“No!”

“Do you want to know?”

“See here!” The girl’s voice indicated reserve strength. “See here!
This is my office. We--I, am obeying the law. Our business is of such a
nature that we do not talk to strangers. To tell you frankly, I detest
people who ask too many questions.”

Fay took the thrust with good humor. “They’re not all the same,” he
said, moving closer to the girl and regarding her with admiration. “Now
you, for instance, know full well that I didn’t come here without being
pretty sure of my ground. You’ll have to answer my questions, or you
will be called to account for a number of nasty accusations. Mr. Mott
is your friend--he also is my friend!”

The girl turned helplessly toward the closed door. She tapped her foot
on the rug. She bent her head.

“How came you to know Putney Stephney?” Fay asked, feeling his way for
a surprise.

“I met him two years ago. He was just a good friend of mine. I can’t
see your purpose in questioning me concerning him.”

Fay watched her lips tremble. He had conceived a liking for Elsie De
Groot over the period of minutes. He said through his white teeth:

“Putney Stephney was murdered last night!”

                *       *       *       *       *

The girl swayed. She reached blindly for the arms of the chair.

“Murdered by an unknown method!”

A gasping sob racked the air. The beat of a powerful engine throbbed
the garage. It was like the roll of a muffled drum.

“Foully murdered! Done to death between the steamship dock and
Poughkeepsie, where he was found with skull crushed and his lungs empty
of air. He was last seen getting into your taxicab!”

“Oh, don’t! It isn’t true!”

Fay leaned until his eyes compelled hers to waver. “It’s true,” he
whispered. “Now, tell me what happened to Putney Stephney? The matter
is going to do the Gray Brotherhood and the Gray Taxi Company
considerable harm.”

“Do with him?”

“Certainly! What did you do with him? The truth, and nothing but the
truth. It’s bound to come out!”

“See here!” The girl braced her shoulders and stared back defiantly.
“See here!” she flashed with sudden anger. “I can give you no
information except--”

“Except what?”

“The record of the call. That is all that I will ever give you or
anybody else. My personal affairs are not to be dragged about by an
amateur investigator.”

“That’s all I want.” Fay turned and motioned for Rake to leave the
office. He waited until the door closed with a click.

“We’re going to be frank,” he said. “I’m here to help you out. You met
Stephney at the dock, after waiting around for hours. I’d judge by this
action that you knew him. He perhaps wirelessed or telegraphed you from
Quarantine.”

The girl brushed her hair from her eyes with the back of her right
hand. She stared at the rug, then into Fay’s keen face.

“I met him by his own appointment.”

“Ah! Now we’re getting on, Miss Elsie. You met him--after waiting a
long time. He had an enormous sum of money. You alone knew that he was
coming. He trusted in you so as to be safe in a city comparatively
strange--to him. He--”

“Trusted me--yes! We stopped at Figaro’s on Forty-second Street. We had
a club sandwich served to us. I sat outside with him because I--I had
these clothes on.”

The girl swept her hands over her leggins and short skirt.

“And then?”

“Why, I took him on uptown within six or seven blocks of the
Rockingham. He said he would walk the rest of the way. I left him on
the curb. He started north.”

“That’s clear,” said Fay. “He started north. Did you see him any more?”

The girl dropped her eyes and studied the design of the office rug. “I
did and I didn’t. He got in another cab--I think!”

“What?”

“Yes. There was no reason for him to do that. He had only a few blocks
to go in order to reach the hotel.”

“What kind of a cab?”

“One of ours--a Gray taxi.”

“Well, don’t you know who was driving it? Was it following you?”

                *       *       *       *       *

A puzzled pucker gathered in a little square upon the girl’s white
forehead. She reached to the littered desk and lifted a call-sheet. She
held this out with shaking fingers.

“I’ve questioned every one of my drivers. No one of them admits taking
Mr. Stephney or anyone else to the Rockingham. I didn’t understand it
last night; I don’t now. It was certainly a taxi painted like ours that
he got in. I thought it so strange.”

“Did this other driver call him?”

“I don’t know. I was turning when I looked up the Avenue. Putney was
running from the curb with one hand raised. He jumped on the
running-board of the taxi, which disappeared from under an arclight. I
didn’t see anything more.”

“Didn’t that strike you as a strange proceeding?”

“Yes, it did! I thought a lot about it. I went over the call-sheet and
asked all of the drivers. Two are out yet, but I know where they were
at the time.”

“Do you often take representatives of the British Government around?
Have they a charge-account?”

“I can’t answer those questions. You must ask Mr. Hilton.”

“Do you want to tell me anything about James Ponsardin?”

The girl started. She folded the call-sheet by running it through her
fingers.

“No, I don’t! You’ll have to see him.”

Fay fished in his pocket and brought forth the same card he had before
shown to the girl.

“You’ll find me at Mr. George Mott’s office. Please call me up if you
discover anything. Ask those two drivers whom you didn’t question. Help
us in every way. This murder is an international matter. Keep thinking
about what happened last night. We must find the murderer!”

Fay laid the card on the desk, bowed slightly toward the silent girl,
nodded to the stenographer, and joined Rake in the run-way of the
garage.

                *       *       *       *       *

The big ex-convict was staring at the group of drivers who were
awaiting assignments. He smiled broadly as he felt Fay’s hand on his
shoulder.

“Some bunch, Chester!”

“Any of your old pals here?”

“The only one I remember is that snob-nosed mechanic over there--the
fellow under that car.”

Fay wheeled. A pair of bright eyes, grease-rimmed and shadowed with
blond lashes, was peering out at him. A tapping sounded upon the rear
axle of the taxi as Fay stooped a trifle. The mechanic extended one
hand and coiled his fingers about a spanner.

“The only one in the place,” said Rake. “I served time with him
somewhere--maybe in Sing Sing, maybe Joliet.”

“Come on, Rake!”

Fay led the way to the sidewalk, nodded pleasantly to the staring
drivers, then turned toward the west. It was at the corner of the block
where he paused and glanced in the direction of the garage.

“The entire case rests there,” he declared without pointing. “Stephney
was murdered in a Gray taxi. He was suffocated in some way to render
him unconscious. He was tossed on top of a freight-train after being
well plucked. This much we know. Now, how was it done?”

“I don’t think a woman was mixed up in it. That girl looked like a
perfect lady. An old night-hawk, who is as crooked as his whip, might
do it. He could get a cab an’ turn the trick.”

“But the mysterious way of suffocating a man?”

The ex-convict scratched his head.

“That’s different,” he admitted. “O’Toole, Flynn, Fogarty, Harris an’
Johnson--they ought to discover something, Chester. Harrigan, Mr.
Mott’s man, sent them running after you telephoned. He’s called on the
Harlem Branch for three more of the Brotherhood to cover the case.
You’ve got nine or ten boys out now.”

“Hardly enough. We’ll get more! Suppose we walk west for a block or
two. I want to think this puzzle over.”

Rake fell in behind Fay. They crossed the street and took a shady side.
The last rays of the western sun struck slanting through the cañon of
tenements. The street resounded with the shouts of urchins playing
ball. A truck went by as Fay paused and clicked keys in his pocket.

He glanced up at Rake.

“We’ll have to cover the Hudson River homes,” he said. “Looks to me as
if the body was being taken over the railroad track when it was thrown
on top of a freight-car. Who is investigating Poughkeepsie and the
routing of the train?”

“O’Toole an’ Flynn went north, Chester.”

Fay dragged out his watch and studied the dial. “It’s too early yet for
them to report. It’s too--”

                *       *       *       *       *

He stared open-mouthed toward the Avenue ahead of him. He reached and
clutched Rake’s arm. He gripped this with fingers of steel.

“Did you see that?”

“See wot, Chester?”

“The Gray taxi that went by?”

“I saw one. I didn’t notice it particularly.”

“It was being driven thirty miles an hour by Elsie De Groot! I’m
positive it was her. Reddish hair and turned-up nose!”

“That’s the colleen who runs the garage?”

“Yes--the girl of the garage! The same little lady who met Putney
Stephney at the steamship dock last night.”

“We’re gettin’ on, Chester. It looks bad for the Brotherhood.”

“And for the Sisterhood! We just finished talking to her not a
half--not twenty minutes ago; and there she goes uptown--full speed and
more.”

Fay eyed his watch and ran a polished finger-nail over the crystal.

“Twenty-two minutes!” he declared, replacing the timepiece in his vest
pocket.

“Let’s go back, Chester.”

“No! We’ll go on to the office of the morning _Messenger_. Foley is
their sporting editor. Perhaps he can tell us something about Ponsardin
and the taxi-company.”

“Nice name!” blurted the ex-inmate. “Sounds like a doped wine an’
deep-dyed villainy.”

Fay grasped Rake by the elbow and hurried him in the direction of the
avenue up which the taxi had flashed. There was no trace of it. Fay
hesitated a moment, like a keen hound on a scent, then fell into a
brisk walk northward, which took him to the somewhat unostentatious
building that housed the uptown offices of the _Messenger_.

Foley, the sporting editor, was in. He greeted Fay with a hand thrust
over a battered typewriter propped upon a broken desk. He thrust aside
a bundle of press clippings and cleared off two chairs.

“Sit down!” he welcomed. “Got some dope on the crook game for me?”

Fay leaned back and glanced about the office with slow caution, then
shot a question at Foley through rigid lips.

“What do you know about Ponsardin--your proprietor?”

Foley tried to wink with lashless eyelids. He upended a huge can of
cold tea, drank deeply, glanced at the keyboard of his typewriter
before he set the can down on the corner of a box which had once
contained ink rolls.

“What do I know? Nothing! He’s a queer stick. Bought the paper about
three years ago. Hardly ever see him. Goes to Washington quite often.
The police are investigating the sheet, I guess.”

“Ah!” said Fay.

“Yep! There’s been talk of the actual ownership being in the hands of a
lot of sure-thing grafters and gamblers. I’m looking for a knockout and
an upper-cut from the postal authorities any time. You can’t pinch me!
I don’t write the editorials.”

“They advocate horse-racing and open gambling?”

“They certainly did--a year or two ago. Now we’ve been instructed to
hit a bunch of contractors and reformers. Take it from me, Fay, I don’t
think the _Messenger_ is making any money.”

“Bills paid and all that?”

“Oh, sure! James Ponsardin is rated three A’s and a One.”

“Is he French or Swiss?”

“Came from Switzerland, I think. Bright fellow, but--”

“Where does he live? Directory gives an apartment on Riverside Drive.”

“I went up there once with some tickets to a bout. He wasn’t there.
Butler said he was up-State. I guess he’s dug in, covered up and pulled
the hole in after him. No one around here or downtown knows where to
find him.”

“Do you know anything about the Gray Taxi Company?”

“The one with the ex-convict drivers?”

Chester Fay nodded.

“No. I heard the bunch talking about it. Why did you ask?”

Fay rose from his chair and threw back his shoulders. “Your boss is
supposed to own it,” he said. “Ponsardin _is_ the owner! I’ve got a
case that’s far from being clear, Foley. I’ll give you first chance
when I’ve worked it out for Mr. Mott. Good-by!”

                *       *       *       *       *

Rake led the way out and down the steps to the street.

“Where to, Chester?” he asked as they stood on the sidewalk.

“Nearest telephone!” said Fay, thrusting his hands in his pockets in
search for some change.

Rake waited outside of the cigar-store while Fay entered a booth. Night
was dropping on the city. The sun had set over the blue barriers of the
Palisades. The lights of Broadway slashed the purple heavens from south
to north. Forty-second Street with its sign-clusters marked the center
of the illumination.

It was a long ten minutes before Fay emerged with his teeth clamping a
slender Perfecto. He passed one to Rake.

“Smoke up!” he said. “It’s on the British representatives. I’ve got a
good lead from Arthur Hilton. It’s one I overlooked in my haste this
morning. I think we get our people tonight!”

“What people, Chester?”

“The crooks who killed Stephney. They were after bigger game. The
others of Stephney’s suite are due on the _Imparada_. Hilton tells me
privately that she has been sighted from Sandy Hook.”

Rake examined the cigar, then lighted it and started puffing.

“I don’t get you! What’s due on the ship? What’s it got to do with--”

Fay started toward Broadway. Rake followed with the question still upon
his mind.

“We’re closing in,” said Fay as he brought a sheet of paper from his
side pocket and spread it out on the palm of his right hand. “I did a
lot of phoning. There’s nothing new at Poughkeepsie--except that the
train upon which Stephney’s body was found was made up on Tenth Avenue,
New York.”

“That’s Death Avenue!”

“It’s well named. It left at seven o’clock. It passed the Harlem River
at eight-sixteen. It reached Harmon at nine-three. It rolled into
Poughkeepsie early in the morning and was shunted on a sidetrack. The
railroad detectives searched it carefully while looking for tramps. It
was then they found the body.”

Rake eyed the sheet of paper.

“Did O’Toole get all that?” he asked.

“Yes. He saw the coroner and the Army surgeon. Stephney was suffocated
and completely out of this life when his body was dropped on top of the
train. That must have been from some small bridge leading over the
tracks to the Hudson River. It was either to a boathouse or a private
estate.”

“Go on,” said Rake.

“Hilton--Sir Arthur--tells me that two members of the same banking
firm, coming over on the _Imparada_, have considerable money with them.
This Commission, of which Stephney was a member, came on different
steamers on account of a secret matter pertaining to pending treaties.
These two members will dock sometime tonight.”

“At the same pier, Chester?”

“At the Southampton Pier.”

“That looks like business. We’ll be there, eh?”

“Right there! We’ll meet the bankers at Quarantine, substitute
ourselves for them, and land, all regular and proper, at the
Southampton dock. I notified Harrigan, at Mr. Mott’s office, to get our
outfits. They’ll be waiting for us with a valet at the Battery. We will
have a valet.”

“What, Chester?”

“Joe Yeader will play that part to perfection. Remember his accent? He
did time in Brixton Jail.”

“I don’t get it all,” blurted Rake. “What is coming off?”

                *       *       *       *       *

Fay furrowed his brow and stared seriously toward the paper in his
hand. He thrust it into his pocket. “I’ll explain later,” he said.
“We’re going right into the lion’s den. We’ll bait the trap with more
banknotes. We’ve got to clear the name of the Gray Brotherhood and the
ex-inmates working for the Gray Taxi Company.”

“Do you suspect that girl?”

“I have every reason to believe she is guilty.”

“She don’t look the part.”

“Looks and beauty are skin deep!”

“She didn’t talk like a gun moll or a fallen sister.”

“She’s employed by a man who is suspected by the police and Mr. Mott.
She has sole charge of Ponsardin’s taxicab interests. She was the first
to meet Stephney on this side of the Atlantic. She was the last to see
him alive, according to her own admission. What would you think from
all that?”

“I think a lot, Chester. But appearances are deceiving. She’d never
admitted takin’ that Stephney from the dock if she was guilty. She’d of
denied it. The only time my Mary, at home, is lyin’ to me is when she
says nothing.”

“Illogical logic!”

“Sure--an’ it’s the truth, nine times out of ten, Chester.”

Fay glanced at his watch and quickened his steps. “We’ll take the
Subway to the Customhouse. From there we go over the Bay.”

Rake scratched his head and followed Fay down the steps, past the
ticket-chopper, and lunged with him into the warm interior of a subway
car. They were hurtled southward. Fay said nothing during the quick
trip. His mind wove the details of the plan which he had to save the
name of the Gray Brotherhood.

He mounted to the surface of the street, closely followed by Rake. He
sought a phone-booth before crossing to the Customhouse. Rake heard him
giving a series of rapid-fire directions to Harrigan, the manager at
George Mott’s headquarters.

Fay emerged, tossed a dollar across to the cigar-clerk and jerked his
thumb toward a box of Perfectos. “Eight of those!” he said. “Eight!”

Outside, in the cool evening, the two men drew a long breath of smoke
for the final plunge. They dodged a flashing taxi, climbed the
Customhouse steps, and found, after consulting an alert doorman, that
the harbor master’s assistant was in.

To him Fay showed his card, his authority from George Mott, and other
identifications. He sealed the matter with a cigar. The assistant to
the harbor master made out passes in duplicate. He found the sealing
wax and a well-chewed pen. He passed the finished documents over, after
a scrawled signature in each corner.

“They’ll take you aboard anything from here to the Hook,” he said,
leaning and watching Fay.

“Thanks!” said Fay. “I’ll see if they will!”

                *       *       *       *       *

The ferry-house was thronged with passengers as the two ex-inmates
searched about for Joe Yeader. These passengers thinned. A man stepped
forward and clucked from the corner of his mouth.

“All right,” said Fay swiftly. “Hop aboard, and we’ll follow.”

Rake trailed Yeader and Fay. The three men secured seats in the
smoking-cabin. Yeader, crossing his legs over a yellow kit-bag, took
Fay’s proffered Perfecto, and drawled:

“At your service, sirs. Beastly sultry night.”

The ferry-boat reached St. George. The three rushed for a train which
would pass Quarantine Station on an inland route. They descended at a
dark station, walked rapidly through silent streets till they came to
the gleaming waters of the Narrows.

Fay saluted a man on guard, showed his authority from the Customhouse,
and received permission to enter the telegraph station.

He turned on the steps and glanced down at Yeader and Rake.

“Stay here!” he said. “Hold the bag. I’m going up and find out when the
_Imparada_ comes in. Also, I shall send a wireless message to the
manager of the Gray Taxi Company.”

Rake started. He frowned in perplexity. “How can you do that, Chester?”

“I’ve got authority to do most anything. I want a Gray taxi to meet us
when we dock with the _Imparada_. Perhaps your nice little blonde with
the turned-up nose will be driving.”

Rake shook his head when Fay disappeared. He clenched his fists and
glanced upward at the topmost light in the dark tower. He swung on one
heel as Yeader touched his shoulder.

“Big ship coming in!”

“The _Imparada_?”

“Looks like it. We’ll have to hurry. Call Chester!”

Fay appeared at Rake’s third shrilling whistle.

“All set,” he said, waving his arm toward the Government dock. “Let’s
get down to the quarantine boat.”

A dark wharf jutted like a pointing finger from a green, sloping shore.
Upon this wharf great, rusty cables and buoys were scattered.

Fay led the way through the buoys and presented his passes to a sailor
on guard before a wire gate.

“Going out to the _Imparada_!” he said authoritatively.

The sailor hitched his trousers, turned, squinted through the sea
mists, then swung the gate.

“You’ll have to hurry,” he said. “The quarantine boat is casting off
her shore lines.”

                *       *       *       *       *

Wrapped in the cloak of gray vapor, the three men crouched forward of
the wheelhouse and stared out across the Narrows to where a great ship
glided like a glow-worm in a garden.

They heard the quarantine boat’s bells as it maneuvered beneath the
towering overhang of the giant passenger ship. They mounted a pilot’s
ladder which had been lowered for the quarantine officers.

Fay whispered into an officer’s ear after he sprang over the rail. He
motioned aft. Rake and Yeader, with the kit-bag, followed closely.

The two British bankers were seated at the taffrail. To them Fay told
his mission, and his object of substituting himself and party, in order
to discover who had slain Stephney. The bankers had already been
informed of the murder. They were noncommittal. They rose from steamer
chairs, studied Fay’s credentials, stared keenly at Yeader and Rake,
then consulted in whispers.

“All right,” they said finally. “Come to our staterooms.”

The transformation which was made while the ship glided to her dock was
thorough and startling. Fay upended Yeader’s kit-bag and sorted out its
contents. He changed his appearance before the eyes of the silent
Britishers. He put on goggles and borrowed a more pronounced checked
cap than the one he had worn to the ship.

He ran a hand across his face, then tapped a well-bound packet
suggestively.

“All set,” he said, looking at himself in a glass. “By Jove! George
Mott or Arthur Hilton wouldn’t know me!”

Wrapping a long mackintosh about his slender form, Fay threw open the
door and led the way to the boat-deck.

“We’ll stand here,” he said to Rake and Yeader. “The ship is almost in.
Now play your parts. Look out for a Gray taxi.”

The ship snugged against the dock, under pressure from two snorting
tugs. Steam plumed aft the giant funnels. A bell clanged its final
message to the engine-room. A gangplank was raised in the gloom. It
steadied and swung inboard.

“Come!” cried Fay; “Follow me!”

The way led down through a companion, along a luggage-littered deck and
past the second officer, who gave the signal that they could descend
the gangplank.

Fay shaded his face from the Central Office men at the foot of the
plank. He turned and motioned for Rake and Yeader. They hurried over
the splintered dock and reached the first of the shore throng to meet
the incoming passengers.

“Go ahead!” said Fay to Yeader. “Lug the bag and find the taxi. Tell
the driver you’re from the British Banking Commission. Pile on all the
Cockney you know.”

                *       *       *       *       *

The throng parted. Fay saw, to one side of the dock entrance, a waiting
taxi. Upon its seat a form crouched. Yeader waved his hand, opened the
taxi door, tossed in the bag and assisted Fay and Rake to mount the
running-board and step inside.

“’Otel Rockingham!” exclaimed Yeader. “Go a’ead!”

The door clicked shut with a strong pressure. The driver lowered the
taxi-meter flag, released the brake and moved through first, second,
and into third speed with the cunning manipulation of a professional.

Fay rubbed the thick plate glass at his side, glanced out at the
flashing lights and street intersections, before he leaned down and
opened the bag.

“Take these,” he whispered, handing Rake and Yeader two heavy
automatics. “Plant them on the seat. Now this hatchet.”

Joe Yeader straightened with the package in his hand. He broke the
string, ripped off the wrapping paper and held out a bright-looking
hatchet.

“Hold it ready!” said Fay. “We’re turning into Fifth Avenue!”

The taxi swerved, straightened and lunged northward. Rake sputtered and
swore as he attempted to open a door. Yeader bent over and tried the
knob on the other door.

“Did you notice our driver?” asked Fay.

“Red hair and turned-up nose,” said Yeader. “What to hell kind of a
bloody trap did we get into?”

Rake turned and pressed his nose against the front glass of the taxi.
He turned as Fay reached and jerked down the blind.

“It’s Elsie De Groot!” he blurted. “It’s the dame of the garage!”

“Listen!”

A slight noise like a steam-exhaust sounded. Fay reached close by the
seat. He pressed one knee against Yeader. He nodded comprehendingly.

“The air’s gettin’ thinner!” exclaimed Rake. “I can’t breathe!”

Fay dropped to his knees, swayed, and ran his hand over the bottom of
the cab. He curled into a knot with his feet on the seat. He raised a
hand and indicated for Rake and Yeader to bend down.

“We’re supposed to be dead!” he whispered. “There’s a suction pump on
the engine that’s exhausting the air from the cab. The driver started
the pump when she started the cab. The windows and framework are built
to withstand enormous outside pressure.”

                *       *       *       *       *

The taxi came to a sudden halt at a curb. The driver sprang from the
front seat, mounted the running-board and pressed a pair of sharp eyes
against the side glass. Fay, Rake and Yeader lay on the cab floor with
their faces shielded by their up-thrown arms.

The driver swung into the seat, raced the engine, and clicked through
the speeds. The taxi darted up Fifth Avenue. It gained Fifty-ninth
Street and turned into the Park. It swung the dark curves on its swift
passage uptown.

Fay’s fingers groped along the seat and clasped an automatic. “Get the
other!” he said into Rake’s ear. “You, Yeader, take the hatchet and pry
at the bottom of the door. I’ve got my hand over the suction pipe. We
wont be suffocated.”

The ride seemed endless. The taxi rolled from out the foliage of the
Park and climbed a long hill. It turned northward along street-car
tracks.

“Broadway!” said Fay, sensing his position. “We’re going right out
Broadway.”

Rake gasped and pressed a finger across his mouth. He coughed, pounded
his chest, and recovered himself. His eyes glared indignantly. He
waited till the taxi clattered over a bridge, then he protested:

“Let me out, Chester. I’ll wring that damn girl’s neck! I can’t stand
this much longer. There’s no air.”

“Sisst!” said Fay. “Are you sure Elsie De Groot is driving the taxi?”

“Sure! I’d swear to it!”

Fay chuckled. “We’ll soon know. This is Yonkers. We’ve passed Getty
Square. We’re turning now. Now we’re going north. Two turns and then a
straight road. I’d know where we are, blindfolded.”

                *       *       *       *       *

It was twenty minutes later when the taxi slowed, backed, then swung
toward the left and took a narrow bumpy road. Fay sat up, pressed his
toe on the sucking exhaust-pipe and clamped his teeth with a suggestive
grind.

“All ready!” he said nudging Yeader. “See, we’re rising. We’re going
across a bridge. Listen! That’s the New York Central Railroad below us.
This is where Stephney was thrown on the freight-train. Now--look out!”

The taxi dropped down a long, sharp incline with its brakes grinding.
It rounded a lodge-gate, swung by a dark, stone house and came to a
sudden halt in a sheltered courtyard.

The driver sprang out. Fay braced his feet against the door. He heard
two voices in whispered conversation. A third joined in with a
protesting snarl. The handle of the door clicked. A key was inserted.
The lock snapped open.

Fay bent his knees, aimed at the exact center of the panel and kicked
outward. He rolled over with the force of his blow. He staggered from
the cab with Yeader and Rake scrambling after him.

“Get up your hands!” he exclaimed, jabbing forward the automatic. “Up!
Up! Up! All three of you!”

Rake lunged swiftly and wrapped his arms about the forward figure of a
startled group. He went down with the man under him.

The two figures in front of Fay’s automatic hesitated, spread, and
bolted to right and left. Fay lowered his gun, fired once at the
ground, then dashed in pursuit of the taxi-driver, whose khaki leggings
were a fair mark to follow.

He gained with each stride. He reached forward, stumbled over a low
wall, and clutched a coat which was torn from his fingers. He bounded
across a roadway, dropped the automatic and made a flying tackle which
brought his quarry to the close-cropped grass.

“Lie still, you!” he ordered as his fingers closed on a pair of
flailing arms. “Get down! I think I know you!”

                *       *       *       *       *

Fay’s hands gripped with strength. He heard a low moan below him, and
eased the clutch he had fastened upon a thick throat. He wheeled and
stared toward the courtyard. Rake had already secured his prisoner. The
big ex-convict was looking up the road, which merged into gloom and
dripping trees. A man was bounding along this road, with Yeader close
behind him. The Cockney raised his revolver in a slow aim. He lowered
it and dashed on. A taxi with blazing cones of yellow light swung over
the bridge across the railroad track and began descending the grade. It
slowed. It stopped with a shriek of metal bands on metal.

Two drivers sprang from the front seat and reached for the man whom
Yeader was pursuing. He sank to his knees in the roadway as other forms
scrambled from the taxi. He was surrounded by a resolute group of
taxi-drivers. Their leader called an order and came running toward the
taxi in the courtyard.

Fay twisted his fingers in a close collar, ran his hand over the figure
below him and found, in a pocket, a matted red wig. He sprang erect.

“The mechanic of the garage!” he exclaimed. “You settle one doubt! You
impersonated Elsie De Groot!”

The leader of the drivers who had arrived in the second taxi ran across
the courtyard, paused, and stared at Fay’s prisoner. She turned with
her eyes sweeping the windows of the silent house. She came over the
grass.

“Just in time, Miss Elsie!” said Fay. “You got a man up the road. Who
was he?”

“A crook! And this is--”

“This is one of your mechanics. He resembles you. He must have had
access to your desk. He impersonated you by putting on a wig after you
set Stephney down on Fifth Avenue. He was Ponsardin’s tool. His taxi
was equipped with a suction pipe and a set of snap locks on the doors.
It was death to enter it. They were after big game tonight.”

The girl shuddered. She turned away from Fay and his prisoner.

“I don’t know how it all happened,” she said. “I suspected the mechanic
after your visit. We followed him tonight. He had a taxi exactly like
ours. We lost him in the Park. We were close behind you. Then--we found
the trail again, up above Yonkers. It led here. You see, he had
different tires than most cars. One was vulcanized on the tread and
made a different mark in the dust.”

“That was clever!”

The girl trembled slightly.

“Who’s the third man,” Fay asked, “the one you looked at before you
came over to me?”

“Oh, that’s Ponsardin! He’s the owner of the Gray Taxi Company. I
wonder what will become of it now? I hate to see the boys lose their
jobs.”

“They won’t, and you won’t. I’m sure I can fix things so that once in a
while I can drop around and call upon Miss Elsie De Groot--President
and General Manager of the Gray Taxi Company--which Mr. George Mott
will surely take care of, no matter what happens to Ponsardin.”

The girl seized Fay’s extended hand.

“That’ll be corking! The Gray Brotherhood has certainly cleared its
name tonight.”

“And so have you!” said Chester Fay with a smile.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the October 1920 issue of
The Blue Book magazine.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAY BROTHERHOOD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


