The Project Gutenberg eBook of Water and power for San Francisco from Hetch-Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Water and power for San Francisco from Hetch-Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park

Author: Martin Samuel Vilas

Release date: August 21, 2022 [eBook #68805]
                Most recently updated: October 19, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Free press association

Credits: Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by the Library of Congress)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WATER AND POWER FOR SAN FRANCISCO FROM HETCH-HETCHY VALLEY IN YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK ***

                             Water and Power
                                   for
                              San Francisco
                                   from
                           Hetch-Hetchy Valley
                                    in
                          Yosemite National Park

                                    by
                         MARTIN S. VILAS, A. M.,
                              Member of the
               Bars of California, Vermont and Washington.

                           Copyrighted 1915 by
                           MARTIN SAMUEL VILAS




UNSOLICITED STATEMENTS

Of U. S. Senator Elect and Ex-Mayor Phelan, Congressman Raker and San
Francisco Officials as to this Article


                                        WASHINGTON, D. C., March 14, 1914.

I can assure you that your clean, clear presentation of the matter was
admirable and much appreciated.

                                                            JOHN E. RAKER.

(Member of Congress from California and author of the Raker Bill).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., February 4, 1914.

I think it was a valuable contribution to the data on that subject and
indicates a considerable study upon your part.

                                                      ANDREW J. GALLAGHER.

(Member of Board of Supervisors, City of San Francisco).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., February 2, 1914.

I read your article in the _Chronicle_ on Hetch Hetchy and want to
compliment you on the thoroughness with which you handled the subject.

                                                           J. S. DUNNIGAN.

(Clerk, Board of Supervisors, City of San Francisco).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 29, 1914.

I ... feel that you are entitled to considerable praise for the concise
and clear manner in which you have covered a very comprehensive subject.

                                                             WM. MCCARTHY.

(Member of Board of Supervisors, City of San Francisco).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 29, 1914.

I read with much interest and satisfaction your very comprehensive and
accurate article on the Hetch-Hetchy.

                                                          JAMES D. PHELAN.

(Ex-Mayor of San Francisco and U. S. Senator elect from California).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 26, 1914.

I beg to compliment you on the clearness and conciseness with which you
have stated many of the controversial points involved in same. I have had
so much of it in the past year and I had to take up so many angles of the
conflict that your resumé is decidedly refreshing.

                                                      M. M. O’SHAUGHNESSY.

(City Engineer, City of San Francisco).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 29, 1914.

... I beg to say to you in person what I long since wrote to the editor
of the _Chronicle_. I stated to him that the article was a very valuable
contribution to the literature on the Hetch-Hetchy subject, and was the
best general exposition of the case that I had read in any newspaper and
that, furthermore, the article was practically free from error. I have
long since added it to my scrap book.

                                                   ALEXANDER T. VOGELSANG.

(Member of Board of Supervisors, City of San Francisco, and member of law
firm of Vogelsang & Brown).

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., February 6, 1914.

I consider it the best resumé of the Hetch-Hetchy scheme that has been
written. I sent to the _Chronicle_ for ten more copies after reading it
in order that I might use it in the future.

I trust that the article will have a very wide circulation, for it
cannot but help convince every fair minded individual not only that San
Francisco’s application for rights has not been hastily considered but
fair play demanded the grant.

Speaking for myself, I thank you very much for your kindly interest in
the matter and for your very careful and comprehensive article.

                                                            PERCY V. LONG.

(City Attorney of the City of San Francisco).

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HON. JAMES D. PHELAN, Ex-Mayor of San Francisco and U. S.
Senator from California.

One of the men most conspicuous in obtaining water and power for San
Francisco from Hetch Hetchy Valley.]

[Illustration: HON. JAMES ROLPH, JR., Mayor of San Francisco, Cal.

One of the men most conspicuous in obtaining water and power for San
Francisco from Hetch Hetchy Valley.]




HOW THE RAKER BILL AFFECTS YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, SAN FRANCISCO, AND THE
REST OF CALIFORNIA

Facts Regarding Mountain Supply

History of City’s Fight for Pure and Adequate Water

BENEFITS TO BE DERIVED

Bay Counties and Irrigation Districts Provided for In National Grant

By MARTIN S. VILAS


The Raker Bill, named for John E. Raker of Modoc county, Cal., a member
of Congress, was reported unanimously by the House Committee on the
Public Lands at the special session of Congress in the summer of 1913,
after a hearing occupying several days, and under its recommendation
passed the House. This bill was reported favorably by the Senate
Committee on the Public Lands, and, after a hard fought contest,
occupying a week on the floor of the Senate, passed that body December
6th, 1913, by a vote of 43 to 25. It received the approval of President
Wilson and became a law on December 19, 1913.

The enactment of this bill ended a continuous effort on the part of San
Francisco, covering a period of many years, to obtain the legal right to
take water from Hetch-Hetchy. It marked the end of a contest, spirited
and hard fought, which was participated in by the magazines and press the
country over, and in which the great majority of publications outside of
California opposed the plan of San Francisco.

As this legislation affords legal opportunity for a water project
primarily for domestic use, which is in itself a signal and notable
work of engineering; as it affects vitally and strongly the irrigation
interests of a state having a length of about 775 miles and a land
surface greater than the combined areas of the six New England States,
of New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Ohio—a State which James Bryce
characterized as an empire within itself; as it gives a State a very
important easement, likely to be enduring, in a national park sharing
alone with the great Yellowstone National Park in distinctiveness and
notoriety; as it is designed to provide the legal means of furnishing
water and much power for the next 100 years for a rapidly growing
metropolitan section, now more numerously peopled than any other west of
Chicago, the Raker Bill and its accessories are of national interest.

For the foregoing reasons inquiry is made:

First—What is Hetch-Hetchy, and what, if any, are the present holdings
and interests of San Francisco in the Yosemite National Park?

Second—What is the Raker Bill?

Third—What will be the operative effects of the Raker Bill on San
Francisco and the rest of California outside the Yosemite National Park?

Fourth—What will be the operative effects of the Raker Bill on the
Yosemite National Park?


I. What is Hetch-Hetchy, and what, if any are the present holdings and
interests of San Francisco in the Yosemite National Park?

(1) Until the agitation connected with obtaining water for San Francisco
brought in the name of Hetch-Hetchy, the writer supposed Hetch-Hetchy to
be probably the name of some Indian chief, some new brand of cigars or
some noted trotting horse. Possibly some of those who read this article
are still nearly as ignorant as was the writer then.

Hetch-Hetchy is the name of a valley through which flows the Tuolumne
River, and has tributary to it a watershed comprising 459 square miles.
It lies entirely in Tuolumne County, California, entirely in the Yosemite
National Park, of which it is the northern portion, and about 165 miles
from San Francisco.

The Yosemite National Park contains about 1500 square miles. Hetch-Hetchy
Valley is separated from the Yosemite Valley by a mountain range having
a mean elevation of over 8500 feet, and distant from that valley about
thirty-five miles by mountain trail. The floor of the valley is between
3000 and 4000 feet in altitude, is level and grass covered, and two or
three miles long and nearly half a mile wide. It is surrounded by steep
cliffs, out of which extend deep gorges. Just back of Hetch-Hetchy is a
gorge a mile deep and one and a half miles wide. The sides of the valley
are granite and very steep and precipitous, rising to a height of between
2000 and 5000 feet in different places. The valley is divided into two
parts by a large ridge of rocks extending nearly across the middle.
The upper end of it is a high, dry area, covered with tall pine trees,
varying between 200 and 300 feet high, and with live oak and other kinds
of trees, thus forming a natural park. The grasses, shrubs, flowers and
trees are beautiful. Several distinguished naturalists have pronounced
the natural growth as very unusual. There are a greater variety of trees
and larger oaks in the Hetch-Hetchy Valley than in the Yosemite.

The area tributary to Hetch-Hetchy is very rough. Edmund A. Whitman,
a lawyer of Boston and president of the Society for the Protection of
National Parks; who has several times visited Hetch-Hetchy, in his
testimony before the House Committee on the Public Lands last summer,
stated:

“I cannot attempt to describe to you the character of the country. It is
some of the roughest God ever made. You do not find little places here
and there with grass and water, but the largest part of the country is
the roughest sort, where camping is as impossible as it would be on the
top of this table. Camping and the use of the park reduces itself to one
thing—the feed of horses. There are only three places in the entire park
where you can take care of horses.”

Hetch-Hetchy Valley is difficult of access. Because of the high, rough
country surrounding it but few people visit it. Thus while 6000 or
7000 people visit the Yosemite Valley each year, less than 300 visit
Hetch-Hetchy Valley. The valley, difficult to reach in summer, is
rendered almost inaccessible as soon as the early snows begin to fall,
and in winter is enshrouded in four or five feet of snow.

The summer season in that high altitude is short, and rendered shorter
than the ordinary in Hetch-Hetchy by the cooling effect of the mountain
streams, almost icy cold, and by the surrounding mountain peaks,
snow-capped except for a small part of the year.

[Illustration: MAP SHOWING PROPOSED TUOLUMNE WATER SYSTEM]

[Illustration: The Upper Hetch-Hetchy Valley

The American City.]

The Tuolumne River rises on the eastern side of California among the
highest crests of the Sierras and for five or six miles flows through
a meadow, but during the next twenty miles drops 3000 feet, in which
distance some of the falls in the river are beautiful and picturesque.
Next it flows for about two miles through Hetch-Hetchy Valley, then
becomes a rushing mountain torrent for twenty miles more, and finally
empties into the San Joaquin River in Stanislaus County, almost directly
east of the southern end of San Francisco Bay.

Lake Eleanor and Cherry Valley are northwest of Hetch-Hetchy. Lake
Eleanor, distant about eight miles, is approximately 1000 feet higher
than Hetch-Hetchy. Cherry Valley is distant about twelve miles and is
approximately 1000 feet higher than Eleanor. Cherry Valley has tributary
to it 114 square miles of territory, all in the Stanislaus National
Park. Lake Eleanor and the seventy-nine square miles tributary to it are
entirely in the Yosemite National Park. The outlets of Cherry Valley and
of Lake Eleanor empty into the Tuolumne River several miles nearer the
San Joaquin than Hetch-Hetchy.

(2) A report of the State Geologist of California in 1879 suggested
Hetch-Hetchy Valley and Lake Eleanor as possible sources of water supply
for the city of San Francisco.

In 1883 a corporation was formed to supply water to San Francisco from
the sources of the Tuolumne River. Filings were made and considerable
work put in. In 1901 the City Engineer was directed to examine the
available sources of water supply for San Francisco. He investigated
fourteen different sources and under suggestion of the reclamation
service spent about $50,000 in detailed investigation of the sources
of the Tuolumne, with a view to utilization at Hetch-Hetchy and Lake
Eleanor. That was before the section was taken into the Yosemite National
Park in 1905.

The city engineer made his report in 1901 when James D. Phelan was Mayor.
This report was immediately approved by the Board of Public Works and
since then has been the settled municipal policy of San Francisco so far
as water is concerned. This report recommended the Tuolumne River in the
following words:

“This source presents the following unrivalled advantages: Absolute
purity by reason of the unhabitable character of the entire watershed
tributary to the reservoirs and largely within a forest reservation.
Abundance far beyond possible future demands for all purposes. Largest
and most numerous sites for storage; freedom from complication of water
rights; power possibilities outside the reservation.

“It has the drawback of distance to overcome, requiring the constructing
of conduits aggregating 142 miles in length. But considering the partial
and rapid rate of pollution to which all other sources may in the future
be subjected, particularly nearby sources, the Tuolumne River is far
superior to any other.”

Thereupon, Mayor Phelan posted notices on the banks of the Tuolumne on
July 29, 1901, of his claim to 10,000 miner’s inches of the waters of
that river, “for irrigation, manufacturing purposes, water power and
domestic use.” Phelan, when his rights matured, assigned them to the
city, as the law did not allow a municipality to make a filing.

Under a grant issued May 11, 1908, by James R. Garfield, Secretary of the
Interior, San Francisco obtained permission to store the waters of Lake
Eleanor and Cherry Valley, develop them to their highest capacity, and
when they should prove insufficient for the needs of the city, to store
water in the Hetch-Hetchy Valley by crossing it with a dam. Secretary
Garfield conditioned in this grant that San Francisco should submit the
proposition to the people of the city for ratification, should buy up all
the land held by private owners around Hetch-Hetchy and Lake Eleanor and
hold such land for the city.

This proposition was voted upon by the legal voters of San Francisco
in November, 1909, in a resolution as to whether or not they wished to
acquire a means of water supply in the sources of the Tuolumne River,
according to the terms of the Garfield permit, and to vote a municipal
bond issue of $600,000 to obtain the land and water rights necessary
therefor. The proposition was carried by a vote of more than five to one.

Thereupon San Francisco paid $174,311.20 for 720 acres of privately owned
land in the Hetch-Hetchy Valley and for certain other lands so held which
were not on the floor of the valley, but which, under the permit, the
city must buy for camp sites, so that when campers were excluded from
the floor of the valley they still might have a place to camp. These 720
acres comprise about two-thirds of the floor of Hetch-Hetchy Valley. They
are now held by San Francisco in fee simple title. Next the city bought
standing timber from the Government around Lake Eleanor for $13,428.77.
Then out of the $600,000 voted, the city bought the land and water rights
claimed by private owners around Lake Eleanor for $400,000.

In January, 1910, under the suggestion of Secretary of the Interior
Ballinger, the proposition to obtain water for the city from the sources
of Tuolumne and to authorize the issuance of bonds in the amount of
$45,000,000 was submitted to the legal voters of San Francisco. Some
30,000 votes were cast and only about 1200 votes were in opposition.

The city supposed it had bought all available water rights of Lake
Eleanor and Cherry Valley. That the city had not soon developed, and
it expended $600,000 more to control these rights. The expense of
investigations around the sources of the Tuolumne has been $300,000 or
$400,000. Hence, upon the project San Francisco has already paid out in
excess of $1,500,000, probably nearly $1,700,000.

Of the $174,000 spent on lands in Hetch-Hetchy, $81,306.18 were spent for
720 acres. For the exchange lands $92,457.02 were expended. 640 acres
outside the valley proper were bought for camp sites under the order of
the Secretary of the Interior. At Lake Eleanor private persons owned
nearly all the dam sites. Now San Francisco owns about one-half and the
United States Government about one-half. Here the development will be
very expensive.

At Cherry Valley almost everything is owned by San Francisco. Owners
of property around Cherry Valley and Lake Eleanor received $1,000,000
for property which cost them approximately $100,000. The area in the
irrigation districts below the dam sites is mostly included in the
Turlock-Modesto district. In the vicinity of Hetch-Hetchy Valley the city
owns 1040 acres and around Lake Eleanor, all in the National Park, 920.33
acres more, making a total inside the park of 1960.33 acres. In Cherry
Creek the city owns 860 acres below Hetch-Hetchy, in Hog Ranch 322.45
acres, and in Ike Dye Ranch 163.68 acres, making a total of 3406.46 acres.

Secretary Ballinger, in 1909, requested the matter be taken up de novo.
At the direction of President Taft a board of three army officers was
assigned by the Chief of Engineers to investigate and report on the
subject of water supply for San Francisco as bearing particularly upon
the need of the sources of the Tuolumne for San Francisco. This board of
engineers was appointed in 1911 and consisted of Colonel John Biddle,
Colonel Spencer Cosby and Colonel Harry Taylor. It occupied two years
in a thorough investigation of all available sources of water supply
for San Francisco and made a complete, detailed report, February 19,
1913. This board testified at length before the Committee on the Public
Lands of the House of Representatives in its hearings on the Raker Bill.
The statements of its chairman, Colonel John Biddle, formed the most
exhaustive, detailed and apparently accurate testimony there given upon
the available water supplies for San Francisco.

Secretary of the Interior Fisher, successor of Secretary Ballinger,
wished the subject investigated as an absolutely new proposition. John R.
Freeman of Providence, R. I., perhaps the ablest engineer in the country
upon water supplies, was engaged and spent much time in California upon
the subject at a cost of about $300,000. Two years were occupied by
these investigations, entirely independent of the work of the board of
army engineers. The result of the research of Engineer John R. Freeman
was a comprehensive report recommending that this source is preferable
to all others, and that the Hetch-Hetchy Valley be developed first and
Lake Eleanor Valley and Cherry Creek be made secondary and accessory
to Hetch-Hetchy. In November, 1913, Secretary Fisher came to San
Francisco and held a hearing lasting ten days, when the entire matter was
presented. Within a week of the retirement of Secretary Fisher from the
Cabinet with the going out of President Taft, the Secretary recommended
that some action be taken on the part of Congress, as the acts of 1901 to
1905, together with the Garfield permit, were somewhat indefinite and the
precise authority of the Secretary of the Interior therein questionable.
Hence the Raker Bill.


II. What is the Raker Bill?

This bill is entitled “A bill granting to the city and county of San
Francisco certain rights of way in, over and through certain public
lands, the Yosemite National Park and Stanislaus National Forest, and the
public lands in the State of California, and for other purposes.” It is
in eleven sections.

The bill grants to the city and county of San Francisco necessary rights
of way through the public lands of the United States to Hetch-Hetchy
Valley, Lake Eleanor and Cherry Valley for the purpose of constructing,
operating and maintaining aqueducts “for conveying water for domestic
purposes and uses to the city and county of San Francisco, and such other
municipalities and water districts as, with the consent of the city and
county of San Francisco, or in accordance with the laws of the State
of California in force at the time application is made, may hereafter
participate in the beneficial use of the rights and privileges of this
act,” and “for the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining
power and electric plants, poles and lines for generation, sale and
distribution of electric energy; also for the purpose of constructing,
operating and maintaining telephone and telegraph lines.”

The whole construction and maintenance is under such conditions and
regulations as may be fixed by the Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture within their respective jurisdictions.

Section 7 is as follows:

    “That for and in consideration of the grant by the United
    States as provided for in this act, the said grantee shall be
    required to assign free of cost to the United States all roads
    and trails built under the provisions hereof; and, further,
    after the expiration of five years from the passage of this act
    the grantee shall be required to pay to the United States the
    sum of $15,000 annually for a period of ten years, beginning
    with the expiration of the five-year period before mentioned,
    and for the remainder of the term of the grant, shall, unless
    otherwise provided by Congress, pay the sum of $30,000
    annually, said sums to be paid on the 1st day of July of each
    year. Said sums shall be kept in a separate fund by the United
    States, to be applied to the building and maintenance of roads
    and trails and other improvements in the Yosemite National
    Park and other national parks in the State of California. The
    Secretary of the Interior shall designate the uses to be made
    of sums paid under the provisions of this section, under the
    conditions specified herein.”

The sanitary regulations are strict under this bill. No offal or refuse
can be placed “in the waters of any reservoir or stream or within 300
feet thereof within the watershed above and around said reservoir sites.”

A filtration plant may be installed at the discretion of the grantee.

[Illustration: Lake Eleanor as it now is.]

[Illustration: The Lake Eleanor Dam Site.

The American City.]

Section 9 provides:

    “That the said grantee shall recognize the prior rights of the
    Modesto irrigation district and the Turlock irrigation district
    as now constituted under the laws of the State of California,
    or as said districts may be hereafter enlarged to contain in
    the aggregate not to exceed 300,000 acres of land to receive
    2350 second feet of the natural daily flow of the Tuolumne
    River, measured at the La Grange dam, whenever the same can be
    beneficially used by said irrigation districts; and that the
    grantee shall never interfere with said rights.”

The last of section 9 provides:

    “That at such time as the aggregate daily natural flow of
    the watershed of the Tuolumne and its tributaries, measured
    at the La Grange dam shall be less than said districts can
    beneficially use and less than 2350 second feet, then and in
    that event the said grantee shall release, free of charge, the
    entire natural daily flow of the streams which it has under
    this grant intercepted.”

Proviso is also made that if the lower irrigation districts desire more
than the usual amount they may have it up to a certain quantity by paying
a rate fixed by the Secretary of the Interior.

Under section 9 other provisions are:

    “That the said grantee shall not divert beyond the limits of
    the San Joaquin Valley any more of the waters from the Tuolumne
    watershed than, together with the waters which it now has or
    may hereafter acquire, shall be necessary for its beneficial
    use for domestic and other municipal purposes.

    “That when the said grantee begins the development of the
    Hetch-Hetchy reservoir site it shall undertake and vigorously
    prosecute to completion a dam at least 200 feet high, with a
    foundation capable of supporting said dam when built to its
    greatest economic and safe height.

    “That the said grantee shall upon request sell or supply to
    said irrigation districts and also to the municipalities
    within either or both said irrigation districts, for the use
    of any land owner or owners therein for pumping subsurface
    water for drainage or irrigation, or for the actual municipal
    public purposes of said municipalities (which purposes shall
    not include sale to private persons or corporations), any
    excess of electrical energy which may be generated and which
    may be so beneficially used by said irrigation districts or
    municipalities.

    “That the right of said grantee in the Tuolumne water supply to
    develop electric power for either municipal or commercial use
    is to be made conditional upon its installing, operating and
    maintaining apparatus capable of developing and transmitting,
    under a general increase in amount, not less than 60,000
    horse-power at the end of twenty years. The said grantee shall
    develop and use hydro-electric power for the use of its people
    and shall at prices to be fixed under the laws of California,
    or, in the absence of such laws, at prices approved by the
    Secretary of the Interior, sell or supply such power for
    irrigation, pumping or other beneficial use.”

The bill further provides that after twenty years the Secretary of the
Interior may require the grantee to develop, transmit and use or offer
for sale such additional power less than 60,000 horse-power as the
grantee may have failed to develop, transmit, use or sell within the
twenty years. In case of the failure of the grantee to carry out these
requirements, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to provide for
the development, transmission, use and sale of such power and power not
developed or used. For that purpose the Secretary “may take possession of
and lease to such person or persons as he may designate” such portion of
the property of the grantee as may be necessary for the purpose in view.

The bill also provides that the grantee shall build certain roads and
trails in and near Hetch-Hetchy Valley.


III. What will be the operative effects of the Raker Bill on San
Francisco and the rest of California, outside the Yosemite National Park?

(1) The situation of San Francisco at the end of a long peninsula is not
one favorable naturally for an abundance of water for a city of nearly
half a million. During the golden days of ’49 the water supply came
from a stream within the limits of the city. This stream is now in the
Presidio and consequently is the property of the United States. Next
Lobos Creek water was carried along the shores of the Golden Gate in a
wooden flume and through a tunnel, then pumped to high reservoirs, from
which it flowed through the city.

As the city grew, the Spring Valley Water Company came into existence
and furnished water for the city from a storage reservoir on Pilarcitos
Creek, about twenty-five miles from the city. This company has gradually
developed its system and about twenty years ago in Alameda county, on the
east side of the Bay, began to obtain water from a large area of gravel
beds. This water was taken into a reservoir, thence through aqueducts
and submarine pipes into San Francisco. San Francisco is now consuming
about 50,000,000 gallons of water per day. Of this amount over 8,000,000
gallons come from private wells in different parts of the peninsula. The
Spring Valley Water Company furnishes about 41,500,000 gallons, of which
about 17,000,000 gallons come from San Mateo County.

City Engineer M. M. O’Shaughnessy of San Francisco testified before
the House Committee on the Public Lands in Washington, June, 1913 that
this city now needs 75,000,000 gallons of water per day and that about
one-third of the city is without water and obliged to haul it in barrels
and wagons. Development of the city has been considerably retarded
through lack of water. Engineer O’Shaughnessy stated before the committee
“for the past three or four months I have been making explorations
all over the city in our narrow peninsula, trying to develop what
strata there are that will be capable in an emergency of relieving our
situation.”

The Spring Valley Water Company is endeavoring to relieve the stress of
the situation by starting the construction of the so-called Calaveras dam
in Calaveras Valley. But the supply of water behind this is uncertain.
The company has built galleries seven or eight feet deep in the gravel
beds, into which the water percolates.

After the disaster of 1906 San Francisco bonded itself for $6,000,000 and
thereby constructed a high pressure auxiliary water system, operating
about seventy-two miles of pipe. A reservoir was built at an elevation of
600 feet, filled through a pumping station drawing salt water from the
bay. Another pumping station is now under construction at Fort Mason.

The city expects to buy the Spring Valley Water Company by condemnation
in case purchase cannot be effected otherwise. Since the passage of the
Raker Bill condemnation proceedings have been begun.

The territory on both sides of the Bay, extending south to San Jose for
about fifty miles, has a common interest in obtaining water. All of its
people look to San Francisco to take the lead. A population of about
1,000,000 is included here, of which Alameda furnishes about 25,000,
Oakland about 200,000, Berkeley about 50,000 and Richmond about 15,000.
Under the law passed four years ago, known as the “metropolitan district
act,” two or more municipalities are allowed to join together in a water
supply association. Oakland, Berkeley, Alameda and some other towns on
the Bay have joined to condemn the local water supply to include Lake
Chabot. But in these towns the situation is even worse than in San
Francisco. The eyes of the people are turned anxiously to that city in
the hope that before long she may obtain such an abundance as to fill out
their lack and to provide for the future of these rapidly growing cities.

The proposition of San Francisco is to build a dam across Hetch-Hetchy
Valley 100 feet at the bottom, 760 feet at the top and 300 feet high.
This will cover 1930 acres of land with water and extend the water back
between seven and eight miles and one and one-half miles wide at the
widest point. It is also proposed to build a dam 150 feet high and 1500
feet long at Lake Eleanor. This will flood 1443 acres. The Hetch-Hetchy
dam and reservoir will supply in dry seasons 250 gallons a day per capita
for 1,000,000 people. Colonel John Biddle of the Board of Army Engineers
estimated the cost of the Hetch-Hetchy supply at $77,000,000.

The final development will give to the command of San Francisco between
400 and 500 million gallons a day. The dams will be of massive masonry.
The water will be carried through cement-lined steel pressure pipes and
concrete lined tunnels ten feet in diameter, cut through the mountains of
the coast range. There will be about eighty-three miles of water tunnels.
Under the formation of water districts this water can be divided between
the two sides of the Bay and approximately 1,000,000 people can now
use it. At the upper end of the aqueduct will be two main power-houses
capable of developing 145,000 mechanical horse-power twenty-four hours
each day of the year.

The present plans of the city provide for its water needs as far ahead as
the year 2,000, when at the present rate of growth there will be over
3,000,000 people around the Bay, causing a necessity for 540,000,000
gallons of water daily.

(2) Before the House Committee in Washington, June, 1913, Colonel Biddle
testified that he had made a personal examination of every available
source of water for the city and in detail described the features of
each source, its advantages and disadvantages. Each one was considered
not merely as to benefits to San Francisco, but as to whether or not the
taking of water would be harmful to other sections now using it for other
than domestic purposes, especially for irrigation.

The testimony of Colonel Biddle was that all the water of California was
needed for domestic use and irrigation; that as the State is settled more
and more, and as better and better facilities are devised for irrigation,
more and more the streams are becoming used for these purposes; and that
the only available sources of water for San Francisco would reach either
the Sacramento or San Joaquin rivers, both flowing into San Francisco
Bay, one from the north and one from the south, and together forming a
valley about 500 miles long.

The chairman of this committee, Scott Ferris, conducted the examination
as follows:

    “With the information before you, coupled with the results
    of these two investigations, if you were a member of this
    committee, having due regard for the rights of the irrigation
    people, those of the nature lovers, who believe that you should
    not interfere with the Yosemite National Park, and the needs of
    San Francisco, which system would you vote for?”

    “Biddle—I would vote for the Hetch-Hetchy system.”

    “Chairman—Would you feel, in casting a vote of that kind, that
    you had inflicted a greater wrong upon the irrigation people
    and the nature lovers than if you had voted for one of the
    other systems?”

    “Biddle—No, sir.”

The other two members of the Board of Engineers gave this testimony:

    “Colonel Cosby—I concur fully with the statement of Colonel
    Biddle. There is not the slightest question in my mind but that
    this should be used as the source of water supply, and not only
    that, but that it will be used as a water supply in a very
    short time independently of whether this project is adopted
    or not. I think the pressure will be so great to conserve the
    water up there that it will be used as a storage reservoir.
    It is by far the best storage reservoir in that section of
    the country, and water is so valuable there that they cannot
    afford to let it run to waste. If you deny the use of it to
    San Francisco, sooner or later the water will be put to other
    uses. Somebody will be asking for permission to utilize the
    Hetch-Hetchy Valley as a storage reservoir for irrigation
    purposes.”

    “Chairman—What do you think of the equitable distribution made
    of it under the terms of this bill?”

    “Colonel Taylor—I do not think the irrigation people have
    anything to complain of in this bill.”

In 1913 the official report of this Board of Army Engineers is stated:

    “The Board believes that on account of the fertility of the
    lands under irrigation and their aridness without water the
    necessity of preserving all available water in the valleys of
    California will sooner or later make the demand for the use of
    Hetch-Hetchy as a reservoir practically irresistible.”

The testimony of the members of the Board obtained great weight because
of their unquestioned technical skill and experience and their positions,
entirely disconnected from local prejudice and interest.

That the Raker Bill will prove of considerable advantage to nearly all,
if not to all, other interests of the State of California outside the Bay
section affected by the Bill seems to have been clearly established.


IV. What will be the operative effects of the Raker Bill on the Yosemite
National Park?

The total area flooded in the National Park will be 3373 acres. Of these
the city owns about 1300 acres. The Government under the Raker Bill will
get, by exchange, the difference between 1300 acres and 3142.78 acres,
which is 1842.78. The city will take from the Government the difference
between 1300 acres and 3373 acres, which is 2072. Hence, the city will
trade to the Government as much land as it takes for flooding, lacking
129.22 acres. The forests to be covered by the flooding are in no part
of the large redwoods, but are of a size frequently found in a California
forest.

[Illustration: MR. M. M. O’SHAUGHNESSEY, City Engineer of San Francisco,
Cal.

One of the men most conspicuous in obtaining water and power for San
Francisco from Hetch Hetchy Valley.]

[Illustration: MR. PERCY V. LONG, City Attorney of San Francisco, Cal.

One of the men most conspicuous in obtaining water and power for San
Francisco from Hetch Hetchy Valley.]

The Chairman of the House Committee before mentioned, finally conducted
this examination:

    “Chairman—Don’t you think, as a matter of fact, that the roads,
    trails, telephones, etc., that would come with this water
    supply development would enhance the usefulness of the park
    from the standpoint of poor people who cannot now go there?”

    “Colonel Biddle—Yes, sir.”

    “Chairman—As matters now stand, it would be pretty extravagant
    for poor people to undertake to go there.”

    “Colonel Biddle—It is impossible for them, unless they go in
    with knapsacks on their backs.”

    “Chairman—Poor people do not visit it at all, do they?”

    “Colonel Biddle—I would not say that, because it is one of the
    great delights of Californians, even if they are not well off,
    to take knapsacks on their backs and go to the Sierras; but
    they do not really stay long in the Hetch-Hetchy Valley. In the
    early summer the mosquitoes are bad, in the late summer it is
    too hot.”

Colonel Cosby of the Board of Engineers gave this testimony:

    “Taylor of Colorado—Do you think these roads, provided for
    in this bill, will make it accessible to a greater number of
    people?”

    “Colonel Cosby—I do. At present I think there are practically
    only two classes of people who use it, people who are unusually
    wealthy or people who are unusually strong and healthy and are
    able to make the trip.”

Seattle, Portland, Oregon, and Pueblo, Col., go into national parks for
their water supplies. Los Angeles goes into a government forest reserve
and brings its water from Inyo County, 220 miles, by aqueduct and more
than twenty miles by tunnels.

Gifford Pinchot, testifying before this Committee, stated: “As we all
know, there is no use of water higher than the domestic use. Now the
fundamental principle of the whole conservative policy is that of use, to
take every part of the land and its resources and put it to that use in
which it will best serve the most people.”

George Otis Smith, director of the Geological Survey, stated: “I think
we will agree that municipal use is the highest value, next irrigation
and lastly power—the generation of hydro-electric energy. I believe the
highest possible utilization of the Tuolumne, or of any river, is that
which provides, as far as possible for a combination of these three
values and the harmonizing of the different uses.”


V. From the foregoing and from all the evidence and conditions developed
under this design, some conclusions are manifest.

The Bay section is the largest urban section in California and is doing
more business than any other. Its growth is rapid. San Francisco is
coming into control of all her municipal utilities. The four great cities
on the Bay are one in interest. They will before long probably be one in
municipal government. This water power will be of tremendous commercial
advantage to these cities. To desire to obtain this water power, is
not sordid commercialism or base greed on the part of this section. It
is an endeavor to make use of the beneficial forces of nature. It is
evidence of a high state of advanced civilization. It is a manifestation
of enlightened government. It is fitting and highly proper. It is a
cause for praise to this city and the lesser municipalities, not for
recrimination and abuse.

That the lake in Hetch-Hetchy will not add to the attractiveness of the
beautiful valley is undetermined. Opinions are divided. The lake and its
accessories will be the means of bringing thousands to a spot hitherto
secluded, isolated and, to many, inaccessible. The highest beneficial use
of nature to civilization is conservation. Were nature allowed to rest,
grand and gloomy, the tall forests and virgin prairie still would lie
between Plymouth Rock and the Golden Gate. The march of civilization may
still go on and adopt unto itself the high forces of nature in an age of
mighty progress and development, and still usually leave “for him who,
in the love of nature, holds communion with her visible forms,” the tall
cliff, the high waterfall, the grassy flower-strewn valley, and here and
there the virgin forest.

It is easy for the sensitive, the fanciful, and the one of moods and
tenses to make themselves believe that an infringement upon what they
regard as proper is an outrage upon decency, and an indication that the
sordid and mercenary are prevailing, and that unless all of the good
and true shall rally to the defense the last bulwarks of decency will be
stormed and the citadel of high purpose, noble resolve and immaculate
life will be forever lost to a ruthless commercialized greed. The forces
of darkness and of distortion are not in overwhelming numbers marching
down the pike.

This bill is not an indication that the grisly hand of avarice and the
cold hand of ambition are seizing hold of the sacred and inviolate.
San Francisco may obtain this water, as good as any in the world, and
sufficient for her thousands to come for the next 100 years. She may
thereby obtain such water power as during the same time will cause all
the wheels of industry on her great Bay to whirl and to whirr. Yet the
Yosemite National Park in the entire and Hetch-Hetchy in particular will
remain, visited by more than ever before, a thing of beauty and a joy
unto the ages yet to be.—_San Francisco Chronicle_, Jan. 18, 1914.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WATER AND POWER FOR SAN FRANCISCO FROM HETCH-HETCHY VALLEY IN YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


