The Project Gutenberg eBook of Old nurse's book of rhymes, jingles and ditties
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Old nurse's book of rhymes, jingles and ditties

Editor: Charles H. Bennett

Release date: March 31, 2023 [eBook #70424]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Griffith and Farran

Credits: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD NURSE'S BOOK OF RHYMES, JINGLES AND DITTIES ***






[Illustration: OLD NURSE AT HOME.]




[Illustration]

                             OLD NURSE’S BOOK
                                    OF
                       Rhymes, Jingles and Ditties.

                        Edited and Illustrated by
                           Charles H. Bennett,
                       _Author of “Shadows,” etc._

                         With Ninety Engravings.

                                 London:
                           Griffith and Farran,
      (_Late Grant and Griffith, successors to Newbery and Harris_)
                     Corner of St. Paul’s Churchyard.
                               MDCCCLVIII.

                                 LONDON:
                    PRINTED BY J. WERTHEIMER AND CO.,
                         CIRCUS PLACE, FINSBURY.




TO SYDNEY ROGERS, A PLAYMATE OF MINE.


MY DEAR SYD.,

If you laugh heartily at the Pictures in this Book, I shall not have
laboured in vain: if you feel glad that the Rhymes are as you and I
remember them, and recognise the few old ones, now printed for the first
time, it will add to the satisfaction I shall feel.

When you have looked well at the other Cuts, please not to forget the
little children at the corners of the pages, they represent all the
different sorts of boys and girls that I could easily call to mind.

And, with love to all at home,

            Believe me to be,
                    My dear little Boy,
                            Your affectionate friend,

                                                       CHARLES H. BENNETT.

LONDON, _November, 1857_.




OLD NURSE’S BOOK OF RHYMES, JINGLES AND DITTIES.

[Illustration]


    A cat came fiddling out of a barn,
    With a pair of bag-pipes under her arm;
    She could sing nothing but fiddle cum fee,
    The mouse has married the humble-bee;
    Pipe, cat,—dance, mouse,
    We’ll have a wedding at our good house.

[Illustration]




    As I went through the garden gap,
    Who should I meet but Dick Red-cap!
    A stick in his hand, a stone in his throat,
    If you’ll tell me this riddle, I’ll give you a groat.

                                              [_A cherry._]

[Illustration]




    As I was going to St. Ives,
    I met a man with seven wives;
    Every wife had seven sacks,
    Every sack had seven cats,
    Every cat had seven kits:
    Kits, cats, sacks, and wives,
    How many were there going to St. Ives?




    As round as an apple, as deep as a cup,
      And all the king’s horses can’t pull it up.

                                        [_A well._]




    A diller, a dollar,
    A ten o’clock scholar,
    What makes you come so soon?
    You used to come at ten o’clock,
    But now you come at noon.




    A, B, C, tumble down D,
    The cat’s in the cupboard and can’t see me.




[Illustration]

    A farmer came trotting upon his grey mare,
          Bumpety, bumpety, bump.
    With his daughter behind him, so rosy and fair,
          Lumpety, lumpety, lump.
    A raven cried croak! and they all tumbled down,
          Bumpety, bumpety, bump.
    The mare broke her knees, and the farmer his crown,
          Lumpety, lumpety, lump.
    The mischievous raven flew laughing away,
          Bumpety, bumpety, bump.
    And vowed he would serve him the same next day,
          Lumpety, lumpety, lump.




[Illustration]

    A long-tailed pig, or a short-tailed pig,
      Or a pig without a tail;
    A sow pig, or a boar pig,
      Or a pig with a curly tail.




    Abbace,
    Daffagee,
    Kellamenoppekew,
    Rustyvee,
    Doubleyou,
    X, Y, Z.




    All of a row,
      Bend the bow,
    Shot at a pigeon,
      And killed a crow.




    A, B, C, and D, pray, playmates agree,
    E, F, and G, well so it shall be.
    J, K, and L, in peace we will dwell.
    M, N, and O, to play let us go.
    P, Q, R, and S, love may we possess.
    W, X, and Y, will not quarrel or die.
    Z, and ampherse-and, go to school at command.




    Bell horses, bell horses, what time of day?
    One o’clock, two o’clock, off and away.




    Barber, barber, shave a pig;
    How many hairs will make a wig?
    “Four and twenty, that’s enough.”
    Give the poor barber a pinch of snuff.

[Illustration]




    Blow, wind, blow! and go, mill, go!
    That the miller may grind his corn;
    That the baker may take it,
    And into rolls make it,
    And send us some hot in the morn.




[Illustration]

    Bah, bah, black sheep, have you any wool,
    Yes, marry have I, three bags full:
    One for my master, and one for my dame,
    But none for the little boy who cries in the lane.




    Brow, brow, brinkie;
    Eye, eye, winkie;
    Nose, nose, nopper;
    Mouth, mouth, merry;
    Cheek, cheek, cherry;
    Chin, chin, chopper.




    Bye, baby, bunting,
    Daddy’s gone a hunting,
    To get a little rabbit skin
    To wrap his baby bunting in.




    Cross patch, draw the latch,
      Sit by the fire and spin;
    Take a cup, and drink it up,
      Then call your neighbours in.




    Cry, baby, cry,
    Put your finger in your eye,
    And tell your mother it wasn’t I.

[Illustration]




    Cock a doodle doo!
      My dame has lost her shoe;
    My master’s lost his fiddle stick,
      And don’t know what to do.




    “Come, let’s to bed,” says Sleepy-head;
      “Tarry a while,” says slow:
    “Put on the pot,” says Greedy-gut,
      “We’ll sup before we go.”

[Illustration]




    Cuckoo, cherry tree,
    Catch a bird and give it to me;
    Catch another
    And give it to brother.




    Cock Robin got up early,
      At the break of day,
    And went to Jenny’s window,
      To sing a roundelay.

    He sang Cock Robin’s love
      To the pretty Jenny Wren,
    And when he got unto the end,
      Then he began again.




    Ding, dong, bell,
    Pussy’s in the well!
    Who put her in?
    Little Tommy Green;
    Who pull’d her out?
    Little Johnny Stout;
    What a naughty boy was that
    To try and drown poor pussy cat,
    Who never did him any harm,
    But kill’d the mice in his father’s barn.

[Illustration]




    Dickery, dickery, dare,
    The pig flew up in the air;
    The man in brown
    Soon brought him down,
    Dickery, dickery, dare.




    Danty, baby, diddy,
    What can mammy do wid’e?
        Sit in a lap,
        And give it some pap,
    Danty, baby, diddy.




    Deedle, deedle, dumpling, my son John
    Went to bed with his stockings on;
    One shoe off, the other shoe on,
    Deedle, deedle, dumpling, my son John.




    Daffy-down-dilly has come up to town,
    In a fine petticoat and a green gown.

[Illustration]




    Diddlety, diddlety, dumpty,
      The cat ran up the plum tree;
    Half-a-crown, to fetch her down,
      Diddlety, diddlety, dumpty.




    Ding, dong, darrow,
    The cat and the sparrow;
    The little dog has burnt his tail,
    And he shall be hang’d to-morrow.




    Eggs, butter, cheese, bread,
    Stick, stock, stone, dead,
    Stick him up, stick him down,
    Stick him in the old man’s crown.




    Elizabeth, Lizzy, and Betsy and Bess,
    They all went together to seek a bird’s nest.
    They found a bird’s nest with five eggs in,
    They all took one and left four in.




    Een-a, deen-a,
    Dine-a, dust,
    Catt’ll-a, ween-a,
    Wine-a, wust,
    Spit, spot, must be done,
    Twiddlum, twaddlum, twenty-one.
    O-U-T, spells out,
    A nasty dirty dish-clout.

[Illustration]




    F for fig, J for jig,
      And N for knuckle bones,
    I for John the waterman,
      And S for sack of stones.




    Flour of England, fruit of Spain,
    Met together in a shower of rain;
    Put in a bag tied round with a string,
    If you’ll tell me this riddle, I’ll give you a ring.

                                       [_A plum pudding._]




[Illustration]

    Four and twenty tailors, went to kill a snail,
    The best man among them durst not touch her tail.
    She put out her horns, like a little Kyloe cow;
    Run, tailors, run, or she’ll kill you all just now.




    Girls and boys, come out to play,
    The moon doth shine as bright as day;
    Come with a whoop, come with a call,
    Come with a good-will or not at all.
    Up the ladder and down the wall,
    A halfpenny roll will serve us all.
    You find milk, and I’ll find flour,
    And we’ll have a pudding in half an hour.




[Illustration]

    Great A, little a,
      Bouncing B!
    The cat’s in the cupboard,
      And can’t see me.




    Hickety, pickety, my black hen,
    She lays eggs for gentlemen;
      Sometimes nine,
      Sometimes ten.
    Gentlemen come every day,
    To see what my black hen doth lay.




    Here we are on Tom Tiddler’s ground,
    Picking up gold and silver.




    Here comes a poor woman from baby-land,
    With three small children in her hand:
    One can brew, the other can bake,
    The other can make a lily-white cake.
    One can sit in the garden and spin,
    Another can make a fine bed for the king;
    Pray ma’am will you take one in?




[Illustration]

    Hey! diddle diddle,
    The cat and the fiddle,
    The cow jump’d over the moon;
      The little dog laugh’d
      To see such sport,
    While the dish ran after the spoon.




    Hicky more, hacky more,
    Hung at the kitchen door,
        All day long,
      Nothing so long,
      Nothing so strong,
    As hickeymore, hackymore,
    Hung at the kitchen door
        All day long.

                  [_Sunshine._]




    Hickory, diccory dock,
    The mouse ran up the clock,
      The clock struck one,
      And down the mouse run,
    Hiccory, diccory, dock.




[Illustration]

    Hark, hark,
        The dogs do bark,
        The beggars are coming to town;
    Some in rags, and some in jags,
        And some in velvet gowns.




[Illustration]

    Humpty Dumpty, sat on a wall;
    Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
    Not all the king’s horses, nor all the king’s men
    Could set Humpty Dumpty up again.




    Here we go round the mulberry bush,
        Mulberry bush,
        Mulberry bush,
    Here we go round the mulberry bush,
        On a cold frosty morning.

    This is the way we brush our hair,
        Brush our hair,
        Brush our hair,
    This is the way we brush our hair,
        On a cold frosty morning.

[_Followed by_ “This is the way we clean our boots,” _etc._]




    Hey ding a ding, what shall I sing?
    How many holes in a skimmer?
    Four and twenty—my stomach’s empty;
    Pray, Mamma, give me some dinner.




    Here we go up, up, up,
      And here we go down, down, downy;
    Here we go backwards and forwards,
      And here we go round, round, roundy.




[Illustration]

    Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree top,
    When the wind blows the cradle will rock;
    When the bough breaks, the cradle will fall,
    Down comes hush-a-bye, baby, and all.




    I had a little pony,
      His name was Dapple-gray,
    I lent him to a lady,
      To ride a mile away;
    She whipped him, she slashed him,
      She rode him through the mire;
    I would not lend my pony now
      For all the lady’s hire.




    I lost my little mare in Lincoln-lane,
      And could’nt tell where to find her,
    Till she came home both lame and blind,
      With never a tail behind her.




[Illustration]

    I had a little doll, the prettiest ever seen,
    She washed up the dishes, and kept the house clean.
    She went to the mill, to fetch me some flour,
    And always got it home, in less than an hour.
    She baked me my bread, she brewed me my ale,
    She sat by the fire, and told me a tale.




    If all the world were apple pie,
    And all the sea was ink,
    And all the trees were bread and cheese,
    What should we have for drink?




    I’ll tell you a story,
    About Jack a Nory,
    And now my story’s begun:
    I’ll tell you another,
    About Jack and his brother,
    And now my story’s done.




    I had a little husband,
      No bigger than my thumb,
    I put him in a pint pot,
      And there I bid him drum.

    I bought a little horse,
      That gallop’d up and down;
    I bridled him and saddled him,
      And sent him out of town.

    I gave him some garters,
      To garter up his hose,
    And a little pocket-handkerchief,
      To wipe his pretty nose.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

    Jack and Jill went up the hill,
    To fetch a pail of water;
    Jack fell down, and broke his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after.




    Jack Sprat could eat no fat,
    His wife could eat no lean;
    And so betwixt them both,
    They lick’d the platter clean.




[Illustration]

    Kiss me asleep, and kiss me awake,
    Kiss me for Dear Willie’s sake.




    Little Bo-peep has lost her sheep,
      And can’t tell where to find them;
    Leave them alone, and they’ll come home,
      Dragging their tails behind them.

    Little Bo-peep fell fast asleep,
      And dreamt she heard them bleating;
    But when she awoke, she found it a joke,
      For they were still fleeting.

    Then up she took her little crook,
      Determined for to find them;
    She found them indeed, but it made her heart bleed,
      For they’d left all their tails behind ’em.

[Illustration]




    Little boy blue, come blow up your horn,
    The sheep’s in the meadow, the cow’s in the corn.
    Where is the little boy, minding the sheep?
    Under the haycock fast asleep!

[Illustration]




    Little Robin Red-breast sat upon a tree,
    Up went Pussy-cat, and down went he;
    Down came Pussy-cat, and away Robin ran;
    Says little Robin Red-breast, “Catch me if you can.”

    Little Robin Red-breast jumped upon a spade,
    Pussy-cat jumped after him, and made him afraid;
    Little Robin chirp’d and sung, and what did Pussy say?
    Pussy-cat said “Mew, mew, mew,” and Robin flew away.




    Little Anne Etticoat,
    In a white petticoat,
    And a red nose;
    The longer she stands,
    The shorter she grows.

               [_A Candle._]

[Illustration]




    Little Tee Wee,
    He went to sea,
    In an open boat;
    And while afloat
    The little boat bended,
    And my story’s ended.




    Little Mary Ester,
    Sat upon a tester,
    Eating of curds and whey;
      There came a large spider,
      And sat down beside her,
    And frighten’d poor Mary away.




    Little Jack Horner sat in the corner,
      Eating a Christmas pie:
    He put in his thumb, and pull’d out a plum,
      And said “What a good boy am I!”

[Illustration]




    Lady-Bird, Lady-Bird
      Fly away home,
    Your house is on fire,
      Your children at home.




    Little Robin Red-breast
      Sat upon a rail:
    Niddle noddle went his head,
      And waggle went his tail.




[Illustration]

    Little Tommy Tucker,
    Sang for his supper;
    What shall he eat?
    White bread and butter.
    How shall he cut it
    Without e’er a knife?
    How will he marry
    Without e’er a wife?




    Master I have, and I am his man,
    Gallop a dreary dun;
    Master I have, and I am his man,
    And I’ll get a wife as fast as I can;
    With a heighly gaily gamberally,
      Higgledy piggledy, niggledy, niggledy,
      Gallop a dreary dun.




    My story’s ended,
    My spoon’s bended;
    If you don’t like it,
    Go to the next door,
    And get it mended.




[Illustration]

    Mary, Mary, quite contrary,
      How does your garden grow?
    With silver bells and cockle-shells,
      And pretty maids all of a row.




    Margery Mutton-pie and Johnny Bo-peep,
    They met together in Gracechurch Street,
    In and out, in and out, over the way,
    Oh! says Johnny, ’tis chop-nose day.




    Multiplication is vexation,
      Division is as bad;
    The Rule of Three it puzzles me,
      And Practice drives me mad.




    My mother and your mother
      Went over the way;
    Said my mother to your mother,
      It’s chop-a-nose day.

[_The above lines are repeated by the nurse when sliding her hand down
the child’s face._]




[Illustration]

    Needles and pins, needles and pins,
    When a man marries his trouble begins.




    O the little rusty, dusty, rusty miller!
    I’ll not change my wife for either gold or siller.




[Illustration]

    Oranges and lemons,
    Said the Bells of St. Clement’s.

    You owe me five farthings,
    Said the Bells of St. Martin’s.

    When will you pay me?
    Said the Bells of Old Bailey.

    When I grow rich,
    Said the Bells of Shoreditch.

    When will that be?
    Said the Bells of Stepney.

    I do not know,
    Said the great Bell of Bow.

    Here comes a candle to light you to bed,
    And here comes a chopper to chop—off—the—last—man’s—head.




    One, Two, Three, Four, Five,
    1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
    I caught a hare alive;
    Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten,
    6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
    I let her go again.




    One-ery, two-ery, ziccary zan;
    Hollow bone, crack a bone, ninery ten;
    Spillery spot, it must be done;
    Twiddledum, twaddledum, twenty-one.
    O, U, T, spells out.

[_Used by Children to decide who is to begin a game._]




[Illustration]

      One misty, moisty morning,
      When cloudy was the weather,
    I chanced to meet an old man clothed all in leather,
    He began to compliment, and I began to grin,
      How do you do? and how do you do?
      And how do you do again?




    Old Mother Goose, when
    She wanted to wander,
    Would ride through the air
    On a very fine gander.

[Illustration]

    Mother Goose had a house,
    ’Twas built in a wood,
    Where an owl at the door
    For sentinel stood.

[Illustration]

    This is her son Jack,
    A plain-looking lad,
    He is not very good,
    Nor yet very bad.

    She sent him to market,
    A live goose he bought,
    Here, mother, says he,
    It will not go for nought.

[Illustration]

    Jack’s goose and her gander
    Grew very fond;
    They’d both eat together,
    Or swim in one pond.

[Illustration]

    Jack found one morning,
    As I have been told,
    His goose had laid him
    An egg of pure gold.

[Illustration]

    Jack rode to his mother,
    The news for to tell,
    She call’d him a good boy,
    And said it was well.

    Jack sold his gold egg
    To a rogue of a Jew,
    Who cheated him out of
    The half of his due.

[Illustration]

    Then Jack went a courting
    A lady so gay,
    As fair as the lily,
    And sweet as the May.

[Illustration]

    The old Mother Goose
    That instant came in,
    And turned her son Jack
    Into famed Harlequin.

[Illustration]

    She then touched her wand,
    Touch’d the lady so fine,
    And turn’d her at once
    Into sweet Columbine.

[Illustration]

    Jack’s mother came in,
    And caught the goose soon
    And mounting its back
    Flew up to the moon.

[Illustration]




    One, two, buckle my shoe;
    Three, four, shut the door;
    Five, six, pick up sticks;
    Seven, eight, lay them straight;
    Nine, ten, a good fat hen;
    Eleven, twelve, who will delve?
    Thirteen, fourteen, maids a courting;
    Fifteen, sixteen, maids in the kitchen;
    Seventeen, eighteen, maids a waiting;
    Nineteen, twenty, my stomach’s empty,
    Please, mamma, give me some dinner.




    Old mother Twitchet had but one eye,
    And a long tail which she let fly;
    And every time she went over a gap,
    She left a bit of her tail in a trap.

                   [_A needle and thread._]

[Illustration]




    Pussy-cat, Pussy-cat, where have you been,
    I’ve been to London to look at the Queen?
    Pussy-cat, Pussy-cat, what did you there?
    I frighten’d a little mouse under the chair.




    Peter Piper picked a peck of pepper,
    A peck of pepper Peter Piper picked.
    If Peter Piper picked a peck of pepper,
    Where’s the peck of pepper Peter Piper picked?




    Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker’s man;
    So I will, master, as fast as I can:
    Pat it, and prick it, and mark it with B,
    Put it in the oven for Baby and me.

[Illustration]




    Pitty Patty Polt,
        Shoe the wild colt,
        Here a nail,
        And there a nail,
    Pitty Patty Polt.




      Pussy cat Mole,
      Jumped over a coal,
      And in her best petticoat burnt a great hole;
    Poor Pussy’s weeping, she’ll have no more milk,
    Until her best petticoat’s mended with silk.




    Polly put the kettle on,
    Polly put the kettle on,
    Polly put the kettle on,
        And let’s drink tea.

    Sukey take it off again,
    Sukey take it off again,
    Sukey take it off again,
        It will all boil away.

    Blow the fire and make the toast,
    Put the muffins down to roast,
    Blow the fire and make the toast,
        We’ll all have tea.




    Quixote Quicksight quiz’d a queerish quidbox,
    A queerish quidbox Quixote Quicksight quiz’d;
    If Quixote Quicksight quiz’d a queerish quidbox,
    Where’s the queerish quidbox Quixote Quicksight quiz’d?

[Illustration]




          Ride, baby, ride!
          Pretty baby shall ride,
    And have a little puppy-dog tied to her side,
    And a little pussy-cat tied to the other,
    And away she shall ride to see her grandmother,
          To see her grandmother,
          To see her grandmother.




    Ring the bell!

[Illustration]

    Knock at the door!

[Illustration]

    Lift up the latch!

[Illustration]

    And walk in!

[Illustration]




    Robin and Richard were two pretty men;
    They lay in bed till the clock struck ten:
    Then up starts Robin and looks at the sky,
    O, brother Richard! the sun’s very high.

    You go first with bottle and bag,
    And I’ll come after on little Jack Nag;
    You go first, and open the gate,
    And I’ll come after, and break your pate.




      Rub a dub dub,
      Three men in a tub;
      The butcher, the baker,
      The candlestick-maker;
    All jumped out of a rotten potato.

[Illustration]




    Rain, rain
      Go away,
    Come again
      Another day;
    Little Johnny
      Wants to play.




    Ride a cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
    To see an old woman ride on a white horse;
    With rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
    She shall have music wherever she goes.

[Illustration]




KISS IN THE RING.

[_This popular game is honored with a variety of jingles, but generally
commencing_—]

    Sally, Sally Waters, sprinkle in the pan,
    Hie, Sally! Hie, Sally, for a young man!
              Choose for the best,
              Choose for the worst,
    Choose for the prettiest that you love best.




    Sing, song, the days are long,
      The woodcock and the sparrow;
    The little dog has burnt his tail,
      And he shall hang to-morrow.




[Illustration]

    See, saw, Margery Daw,
      Johnny shall have a new master:
    He shall have but a penny a day,
      Because he can’t work any faster.




    See, saw, Margery Daw,
    Sold her bed and lay upon straw:
    Was not she a dirty slut,
    To sell her bed and lie in the dirt!




    See, saw, sacradown,
    Which is the way to London town?
    One foot up, the other foot down,
    That is the way to London town.




    Snail, snail, come out of your hole,
      Or else I will beat you as black as a coal.




[Illustration]

    Sing a song of sixpence,
      A pocket full of rye;
    Four and twenty blackbirds
      Baked in a pie;

    When the pie was open’d,
      The birds began to sing;
    Was not that a dainty dish,
      To set before the king?

    The king was in his counting-house,
      Counting out his money;
    The queen was in the parlour,
      Eating bread and honey.

    The maid was in the garden,
      Hanging out the clothes;
    Down came a blackbird,
      And pecked off her nose.




[Illustration]

    Simple Simon met a pieman
      Going to the fair:
    Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
      “Let me taste your ware.”

    Says the pieman to Simple Simon,
      “Shew me first your penny.”
    Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
      “Indeed I have not any.”

    Simple Simon went a fishing
      For to catch a whale;
    All the water he had got
      Was in his mother’s pail.

    Simple Simon went to look
      If plums grew on a thistle;
    He prick’d his fingers very much,
      Which made poor Simon whistle.




    Shoe the colt, shoe the colt,
      Shoe the grey mare;
    If the colt won’t be shod,
      Let him go bare.




    Sing, sing, what shall I sing?
    Puss has stolen the pudding-string!
    Do, do, what shall I do?
    Puss has bit it quite in two!




    There was a man in double deed,
    Who sow’d his garden full of seed;
    And when the seed began to grow,
    ’Twas like a garden full of snow;
    And when the snow began to fall,
    ’Twas like a bird upon the wall;
    And when the bird away did fly,
    ’Twas like an eagle in the sky;
    And when the sky began to roar,
    ’Twas like a lion at the door;
    And when the door began to crack,
    ’Twas like a stick across your back;
    And when your back began to smart,
    ’Twas like a penknife in your heart;
    And when your heart began to bleed,
    You’re dead, and dead, and dead, indeed.




    Three wise men of Gotham
    Went to sea in a bowl,
    If the bowl had been stronger,
    My song had been longer.




[Illustration]

      There was a little man,
      And he had a little gun,
    And his bullets they were made of lead, lead, lead;
      He shot Johnny Sprig
      Through the middle of the wig,
    And he knocked it right off his head, head, head.




    The Queen of Hearts,
    She made some tarts,
      All on a summer’s day:
    The Knave of Hearts,
    He stole the tarts,
      And took them clean away.
    The King of Hearts,
    Call’d for the tarts,
      And beat the knave full sore:
    The Knave of Hearts
    Brought back the tarts,
      And vow’d he’d steal no more.




[Illustration]

    The lion and the unicorn
    Were fighting for the crown;
    Some gave them white bread,
    And some gave them brown;
    Some gave them plum-cake,
    And sent them out of the town.




    The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,
    And what will poor Robin do then?
                          Poor thing!
    He’ll sit in a barn,
    To keep himself warm,
    And hide his head under his wing,
                          Poor thing.




    Taffy was a Welchman, Taffy was a thief;
    Taffy came to my house, and stole a piece of beef:
    I went to Taffy’s house, Taffy was not at home;
    Taffy came to my house, and stole a marrow-bone:
    I went to Taffy’s house, Taffy was in bed,
    I took the marrow-bone, and beat about his head.




[Illustration]

    There was a crooked man, and he went a crooked mile,
    He found a crooked sixpence against a crooked stile;
    He bought a crooked cat, which caught a crooked mouse,
    And they all lived together in a little crooked house.




    The man in the moon,
      Came down too soon,
    And ask’d his way to Norwich;
      He went by the south,
    And burnt his mouth
      With eating cold pease-porridge.




    There was an old soldier of Bister,
    Went walking one day with his sister;
      When a cow at a poke,
      Toss’d her into an oak,
    Before the old gentleman miss’d her.




[Illustration]

    There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
    She had so many children she didn’t know what to do;
    She gave them some broth without any bread,
    She whipp’d them all soundly, and sent them to bed.




    There was an old woman, and what do you think?
    She lived upon nothing but victuals and drink:
    Victuals and drink were the chief of her diet;
    This plaguy old woman could never be quiet.
    She went to the baker to buy her some bread,
    And when she came home her old husband was dead;
    She went to the clerk to toll the bell,
    And when she came back her old husband was well.




[Illustration]

[_A Song set to fingers or toes._]

    1. This pig went to market;
    2. This pig staid at home;
    3. This pig had plenty to eat,
    4. But this pig had none;
    5. And this little pig said, Wee, wee, wee!
       All the way home.




    There was an old man of Thessaly,
      And he was wondrous wise,
    He jumped into a quickset hedge,
      And scratch’d out both his eyes;
    But when he saw his eyes were out,
      With all his might and main,
    He jump’d into a holly-bush,
      And scratch’d them in again.




    There was an old woman
      Lived under a hill;
    And if she’s not gone,
      She lives there still.




[Illustration]

    There was a fat man of Bombay,
    Who was smoking one sun-shiny day,
    When a bird, called a snipe,
    Flew away with his pipe,
    Which vex’d the fat man of Bombay.




    The man in the wilderness ask’d of me,
    How many strawberries grew in the sea?
    I answer’d him, as I thought good,
    As many red herrings as grew in the wood.




[Illustration]

    There was an old woman, as I’ve heard tell,
    She went to market her eggs for to sell;
    She went to market all on a market day,
    And she fell asleep on the king’s highway.

    There came by a pedlar whose name was Stout,
    He cut her petticoats all round about;
    He cut her petticoats up to the knees,
    Which made the old woman to shiver and freeze.

    When this little woman first did wake,
    She began to shiver and she began to shake;
    She began to wonder and she began to cry,
    “Lauk a mercy on me, this is none of I!”

    “But if it be I, as I do hope it be,
    I’ve a little dog at home, and he’ll know me;
    If it be I, he’ll wag his little tail,
    And if it be not I, he’ll loudly bark and wail.”

    Home went the little woman all in the dark,
    Up got the little dog, and he began to bark;
    He began to bark, so she began to cry,
    “Lauk a mercy on me, this is none of I!”




    There were two birds sat on a stone,
          Fa, la, la, la, lal, de;
    One flew away, and then there was one,
          Fa, la, la, la, lal, de;
    The other flew after, and then there was none,
          Fa, la, la, la, lal, de;
    And so the poor stone was left all alone,
          Fa, la, la, la, lal, de!




[Illustration]

    Two legs sat upon three legs,
    With one leg in his lap;
    In comes four legs,
    And runs away with one leg;
    Up jumps two legs,
    Catches up three legs,
    Throws it after four legs,
    And makes him bring back one leg.




    The girl in the lane, that couldn’t speak plain,
        Cried gobble, gobble, gobble:
    The man on the hill that could’nt stand still,
        Went hobble, hobble, hobble.




[Illustration]

    There was a monkey climbed up a tree,
    When he fell down, then down fell he.

    There was a crow sat on a stone,
    When he was gone, then there was none.

    There was an old wife did eat an apple,
    When she eat two, she had eat a couple.

    There was a horse going to the mill,
    When he went on, he stood not still.

    There was a butcher cut his thumb,
    When it did bleed, then blood did come.

    There was a lackey ran a race,
    When he ran fast, he ran apace.

    There was a cobbler clouting shoon,
    When they were mended, they were done.

    There was a navy went into Spain,
    When it return’d it came again.




    There was a little guinea-pig,
    Who, being little, was not big,
    He always walked upon his feet,
    And never fasted when he eat.

    When from a place he ran away,
    He never at that place did stay;
    And when he ran, as I am told,
    He ne’er stood still for young or old.

    He often squeak’d, and sometimes vi’lent,
    And when he squeak’d he ne’er was silent;
    Though ne’er instructed by a cat,
    He knew a mouse was not a rat.

    One day, as I am certified,
    He took a whim and fairly died;
    And, I am told by men of sense,
    He never has been living since.




[Illustration]

    There was an old woman toss’d up in a basket,
    Nineteen times as high as the moon,
    Where she was going I couldn’t but ask it,
    For in her hand she carried a broom.

    “Old woman, old woman, old woman,” quoth I,
      “O whither, O whither, O whither, so high?”
    “To brush the cobwebs off the sky!”
      “Shall I go with thee?” “Aye, by and by.”




    Three blind mice, see how they run!
    They all ran after the farmer’s wife,
    Who cut off their tails with a carving knife,
    Did you ever see such fools in your life?
                          Three blind mice.




    Thumbikin, Thumbikin, broke the barn,
    Pinnikin, Pinnikin, stole the corn,
    Long back’d Gray
    Carried it away.
    Old Mid-man sat and saw,
    But Peesy-weesy, paid for a’.




    There was an old man,
    And he had a calf,
      And that’s half;
    He took him out of the stall,
    And put him on the wall;
      And that’s all.




[Illustration]

    There was an old woman called Nothing-at-all,
    Who rejoiced in a dwelling exceedingly small:
    A man stretched his mouth to its utmost extent,
    And down at one gulp house and old woman went.




[Illustration]

    This is the way the ladies ride;
        Tri, tre, tre, tree,
        Tri, tre, tre, tree!
    This is the way the ladies ride,
        Tri, tre, tre, tree, tri-tre-tre-tree!

    This is the way the gentlemen ride;
        Gallop-a-trot,
        Gallop-a-trot!
    This is the way the gentlemen ride,
        Gallop-a-gallop-a-trot!

    This is the way the farmers ride;
        Hobbledy-hoy,
        Hobbledy-hoy!
    This is the way the farmers ride,
        Hobbledy hobbledy-hoy!




    The cuckoo’s a fine bird,
      He sings as he flies;
    He brings us good tidings,
      He tells us no lies.

    He sucks little birds’ eggs,
      To make his voice clear;
    And when he sings “Cuckoo!”
      The summer is near.




[Illustration]

    Tom he was a piper’s son,
    He learned to play when he was young;
    But all the tune that he could play,
    Was “Over the hills and far away.”

    But Tom with his pipe made such a noise,
    That he pleased both the girls and boys;
    And they stopp’d to hear him play,
    “Over the hills and far away.”

    Tom with his pipe did play with such skill,
    That those who heard him could never keep still;
    Whenever they heard they began for to dance,
    Even pigs on their hind legs would after him prance.

    As Dolly was milking her cow one day,
    Tom took out his pipe and began for to play;
    So Doll and the cow danced “the Cheshire round,”
    Till the pail was broke, and the milk ran on the ground.

    He met old dame Trot with a basket of eggs,
    He used his pipe, and she used her legs;
    She danced about till the eggs were all broke,
    She began for to fret, but he laugh’d at the joke.

    He saw a cross fellow was beating an ass,
    Heavy laden with pots, pans, dishes, and glass;
    He took out his pipe and play’d them a tune,
    And the jackass’s load was lighten’d full soon.




[Illustration]

    Tom, Tom, the piper’s son,
    Stole a pig and away he run!
    The pig was eat, and Tom was beat,
    And Tom went roaring down the street.




    Thumb bold,
    Thibity-thold,
    Langman,
    Lick pan,
    Mamma’s little man.




[Illustration]

    Tit, tat, toe,
    My first go,
    Three jolly butcher boys
    All in a row;
    Stick one up,
    Stick one down,
    Stick one on the old man’s crown.




    There was an old woman had three sons,
    Jerry, and James, and John;
    Jerry was hung, James was drown’d,

    John was lost and never was found;
    And there was an end of the three sons,
    Jerry, and James, and John.




[Illustration]

    The sow came in with the saddle;
    The little pig rock’d the cradle;
    The dish jump’d up on the table,
    To see the pot swallow the ladle.
    The spit that stood behind the door,
    Threw the pudding-stick on the floor.
    Oh! said the gridiron, can’t you agree?
    I’m the head constable, bring them to me.




[Illustration]

    ’Twas once upon a time
      When Jenny Wren was young,
    So daintily she danced,
      And so prettily she sung;
    Robin Redbreast lost his heart,
      For he was a gallant bird;
    So he doff’d his hat to Jenny Wren,
      Requesting to be heard.

    O dearest Jenny Wren!
      If you will but be mine,
    You shall feed on cherry-pie, you shall,
      And drink new currant-wine;
    I’ll dress you like a goldfinch,
      Or any peacock gay;
    So, dearest Jen, if you’ll be mine,
      Let us appoint the day.

    Jenny blush’d behind her fan,
      And thus declared her mind;
    Since, dearest Bob, I love you well,
      I’ll take your offer kind;
    Cherry-pie is very nice,
      And so is currant-wine;
    But I must wear my plain brown gown,
      And never go too fine.

    Robin Redbreast rose up early,
      All at the break of day,
    And he flew to Jenny Wren’s house,
      And sung a roundelay;
    He sang of Robin Redbreast,
      And little Jenny Wren,
    And when he came unto the end,
      He then began again.




[Illustration]

    Jenny Wren fell sick
      Upon a merry time;
    In came Robin Redbreast,
      And brought her sops and wine.

    Eat well of the sop, Jenny,
      Drink well of the wine;
    Thank you, Robin, kindly,
      You shall be mine.

    Jenny, she got well,
      And stood upon her feet,
    And told Robin plainly,
      She loved him not a bit.

    Robin being angry,
      Hopp’d upon a twig;
    Saying, Out upon you, Jenny!
      Fy upon you, bold faced jig!




    To market, to market, to buy a fat pig,
    Home again, home again, dancing a jig;
    Ride to the market to buy a fat hog,
    Home again, home again, jiggety-jog.




[Illustration]

    Tell tale, tit!
    Your tongue shall be slit,
    And all the dogs in the town
    Shall have a little bit.




    Two little dicky birds sat upon a hill,
    One nam’d Jack, the other named Jill;
    Fly away, Jack! fly away, Jill!
    Come again, Jack! come again, Jill!




    Three children sliding on the ice
      Upon a summer’s day,
    As it fell out, they all fell in,
      The rest they ran away.

    Now had these children been at home,
      Or sliding on dry ground,
    Ten thousand pounds to one penny
      They had not all been drown’d.

    You parents all that children have,
      And you that have got none,
    If you would have them safe abroad,
      keep them safe at home.




    Thirty days hath September,
    April, June, and November:
    February has twenty-eight alone,
    All the rest have thirty-one,
    Excepting leap-year, that’s the time
    When February’s days are twenty-nine.




        There was a little man
        And he woo’d a little maid,
    And he said, “Little maid, will you wed, wed, wed?
        I have little more to say,
        Than will you, Yea or Nay,
    For least said is soonest mended-ded, ded, ded.”




    The art of good driving’s a paradox quite,
      Though custom has proved it so long;
    If you go to the left, you’re sure to go right,
      If you go to the right, you go wrong.




    Twelve huntsmen with horns and hounds,
    Hunting over other men’s grounds!
    Eleven ships sailing o’er the main,
    Some bound for France and some for Spain:
    I wish them all safe home again:
    Ten comets in the sky,
    Some low and some high;
    Nine peacocks in the air,
    I wonder how they all came there,
    I do not know and I do not care;
    Eight joiners in joiner’s hall,
    Working with the tools and all;
    Seven lobsters in a dish,
    As fresh as any heart could wish;
    Six beetles against the wall,
    Close by an old woman’s apple stall;
    Five puppies of our dog “Ball,”
    Who daily for their breakfast call;
    Four horses stuck in a bog,
    Three monkeys tied to a clog;
    Two pudding-ends would choke a dog,
    With a gaping, wide-mouthed, waddling frog.




    There was a man, and his name was Dob,
    And he had a wife, and her name was Mob,
    And he had a dog, and he called it Cob,
    And she had a cat, called Chitterabob.
                      Cob, says Dob,
                      Chitterabob, says Mob,
                      Cob was Dob’s dog,
                      Chitterabob Mob’s cat.




    Up she goes and down she comes,
    If you haven’t got apples, I’ll give you some plums.




[Illustration]

    Upon my word and honour,
    As I was going to Bonner,
    I met a pig,
    Without a wig,
    Upon my word and honour.




    Vinegar, veal, and venison,
    Are very good victuals, I vow.




    When a Twister a twisting, will twist him a twist;
    For the twisting of his twist, he three times doth intwist;
    But if one of the twines of the twist do untwist,
    The twine that untwisteth, untwisteth the twist.

    Untwirling the twine that untwisteth between,
    He twirls, with the twister, the two in a twine:
    Then twice having twisted the twines of the twine,
    He twisteth the twine he had twined in twain.

    The twain that, in twining, before in the twine,
    As twines were intwisted; he now doth untwine:
    ’Twixt the twain inter-twisting a twine more between
    He, twirling his twister, makes a twist of the twine.




      We’re all in the dumps,
      For diamonds are trumps;
    The kittens are gone to St. Paul’s!
      The babies are bit,
      The moon’s in a fit,
    And the houses are built without walls.




[Illustration]

    When good king Arthur ruled this land,
      He was a goodly king;
    He stole three pecks of barley-meal,
      To make a bag-pudding.

    A bag pudding the king did make,
      And stuff’d it well with plums:
    And in it put great lumps of fat,
      As big as my two thumbs,

    The king and queen did eat thereof,
      And noblemen beside;
    And what they could not eat that night,
      The queen next morning fried.




    What are little boys made of, made of,
    What are little boys made of?
    Snaps and snails, and puppy-dog’s tails;
    And that’s what little boys are made of, made of.

    What are little girls made of, made of, made of,
    What are little girls made of?
    Sugar and spice, and all things that are nice;
    And that’s what little girls are made of, made of.




    What shoe-maker makes shoes without leather,
    With all the four elements put together?
      Fire and water, earth and air;
      Ev’ry customer has two pair.

                                 [_A horse-shoe._]




    Wash, hands, wash,
      Daddy’s gone to plough,
    If you want your hands wash’d,
      Have them wash’d now.




    Wash on Friday,
    Wash in need;
    Wash on Saturday,
    Slut indeed.




[Illustration]

    When I was a bachelor, I lived all by myself,
    And all the bread and cheese I got I put upon the shelf.
    The rats and the mice they made such a strife,
    I was forced to go to London to buy me a wife.
    The roads were so bad, and the lanes were so narrow,
    I was forced to bring my wife home in a wheel-barrow.
    The wheel-barrow broke, and my wife had a fall,
    Down came wheel-barrow, wife, and all.




    You shall have an apple,
      You shall have a plum,
    You shall have a rattle-basket,
      When your dad comes home.




    X shall stand for playmates Ten;
    V for Five stout stalwart men;
    I for but One, as I’m alive;
    C for a Hundred, and D for Five;
    M for a Thousand soldiers true;
    And all these figures I’ve told to you.




    Yet didn’t you see, yet didn’t you see,
        What naughty tricks they put upon me?
    They broke my pitcher, and spilt my water;
    And huff’d my mother, and chid her daughter;
        And kissed my sister instead of me.




[Illustration]

    Zany, Zany, Zaddlepate,
    Go to bed early and get up late.




New and Popular Works,

Principally for the Young.

PUBLISHED BY GRIFFITH AND FARRAN,

Corner of St. Paul’s Churchyard.


A BEAUTIFUL WEDDING GIFT.

Elegantly bound in a new white morocco cloth, with richly gilt sides.
Quarto, price One Guinea.

The Bridal Souvenir;

    Containing the choicest thoughts of the best Authors in Prose
    and Verse, on bridal joys and wedded life. Richly Illuminated
    in gold and colours, designed by Mr. SAMUEL STANESBY.

⁂ In the preparation of this volume, no expense has been spared to
produce a Gift Book of the most appropriate character and permanent
value. It consists of thirty-six quarto pages of elegant illuminated
printing, the design of each page presenting, not merely an ornamental
accompaniment to the text, but also an emblematical exposition of it in
the poetical language of flowers.


MR. KINGSTON’S BOOK FOR BOYS.

Fred. Markham in Russia;

    or, The Boy Travellers in the Land of the Czar. By W. H. G.
    KINGSTON, Esq., Author of “Salt Water,” “Peter the Whaler,”
    etc. With illustrations by R. T. LANDELLS. Fcap. 8vo., price
    5_s._ cloth; 5_s._ 6_d._ gilt-edges.

The Adventures and Experiences of Biddy Dorking;

    and of the Fellow Fat Frog. By A. S., edited by Mrs. S. C.
    HALL, with illustrations by HARRISON WEIR. Super-royal 16mo.,
    price 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth; 3_s._ 6_d._ coloured gilt edges.

Might not Right;

    or, Stories of the Discovery and Conquest of America, by the
    Author of “Our Eastern Empire,” “The Martyr Land,” etc. With
    Illustrations by JOHN GILBERT. Royal 16mo., price 3_s._ 6_d._
    cloth; 4_s._ 6_d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Clara Hope;

    or, the Blade and the Ear. By ELIZABETH MILNER, Author of “The
    Twins, or Home Scenes,” etc., with Frontispiece by BIRKET
    FOSTER. Fcap. 8vo., price 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth; 4_s._ 6_d._ cloth,
    elegant gilt edges.

Maud Summers, the Sightless;

    A Narrative for the Young. With illustrations by JOHN ABSOLON.
    Super-royal 16mo., price 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth; 4_s._ 6_d._
    coloured, gilt edges.

The Story of Jack and the Giants;

    With thirty-five illustrations by RICHARD DOYLE. Beautifully
    printed in the olden style. New and cheaper edition. Fcap.
    quarto, price 2_s._ 6_d._, fancy boards; or, coloured, cloth
    extra, gilt edges, 4_s._ 6_d._

Jack Frost and Betty Snow;

    With other Tales for Wintry Nights and Rainy Days. Illustrated
    by HARRISON WEIR. Super-royal 16mo, price 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth;
    3_s._ 6_d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Historical Acting Charades;

    or, Amusements for Winter Evenings. A new Edition by the Author
    of “Cat and Dog,” or Puss and the Captain, “The Doll and her
    Friends,” etc. Fcap. 8vo. price 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth; 4_s._ gilt
    edges.

Home Pastime;

    or, The Child’s Own Toy Maker. The subjects printed on
    Cards for cutting out, with a book of plain and practical
    instructions, in a neat case. Price 5_s._

    “As a delightful exercise of ingenuity, and a most sensible
    mode of passing a winter’s evening, we recommend “The
    Child’s own Toy Maker,” with its little book of practical
    instructions.”—_Illustrated Times._


W. H. G. KINGSTON.

Salt Water;

    or, Niel D’Arcy’s Sea Life and Adventures (a Book for Boys).
    By W. H. G. KINGSTON, Author of “Blue Jackets,” “Peter the
    Whaler,” “Mark Seaworth,” etc. With eight illustrations. Fcap.
    8vo., price 5_s._ cloth; 5_s._ 6_d._ gilt edges.

Our Eastern Empire;

    or, Stories from the History of British India. By the Author of
    “Might not Right,” “The Martyr Land,” etc. With illustrations.
    Royal 16mo. 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth; 4_s._ 6_d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Granny’s Wonderful Chair;

    And its Tales of Fairy Times. By FRANCES BROWNE. With
    illustrations by KENNY MEADOWS. Small quarto, 3_s._ 6_d._
    cloth; 4_s._ 6_d._ coloured, gilt edges.

Cat and Dog:

    or, Memoirs of Puss and the Captain. A Story founded on fact.
    By the Author of “The Doll and her Friends.” Illustrated by H.
    WEIR. 4th Edition. Price 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth; plain, 3_s._ 6_d._
    coloured, gilt edges.

Laugh and Grow Wise;

    By the Senior Owl of Ivy Hall. With Sixteen large coloured
    illustrations. 4to. price 2_s._ 6_d._

Pictures from the Pyrenees;

    or, Agnes and Kate’s Travels. With numerous illustrations.
    Small 4to., price 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._ coloured, gilt
    edges.


A BOOK FOR EVERY CHILD.

The Favourite Picture Book;

    A Gallery of Delights, designed for the Amusement and
    Instruction of the Young. With several Hundred Illustrations
    by Eminent Artists. Royal 4to., price 3_s._ 6_d._ bound in
    an elegant cover; 7_s._ 6_d._ coloured, or mounted on cloth;
    10_s._ 6_d._ mounted and coloured.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD NURSE'S BOOK OF RHYMES, JINGLES AND DITTIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


