The Project Gutenberg eBook of A libell of Spanish lies
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A libell of Spanish lies
        found at the sacke of Cales, discoursing the fight in the West Indies, twixt the English navie being fourteene ships and pinasses, and a fleete of twentie saile of the king of Spaines, and of the death of Sir Francis Drake

Author: Captain Henry Savile

Contributor: Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda

Release date: June 27, 2023 [eBook #71057]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: F. Shoberl

Credits: John Campbell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIBELL OF SPANISH LIES ***





  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  This book is a faithful reproduction of the original book printed
  around 1600, including all the printing errors of that edition,
  and this etext maintains that careful reproduction. No spelling
  or punctuation corrections have been made, and minimal spacing
  adjustments have been made, in order to preserve the historical
  value of the original work.

  The diacritical ~ (tilde) mark is sometimes used in this book on the
  letters a, e, o, u and q. These will display, using the Unicode
  combining tilde diacritical, on this device as:
  ã, ẽ, õ, ũ, q̃.

  The long-s ſ has been replaced by s throughout the etext.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




The subsequent facsimile is made from the original in the possession
of the donor.

Only five copies of it appear to be known: three of these are in
public libraries, and two of the three are more or less imperfect:
one of them wants four pages, and of the other some of the marginal
notes have been cut away, and a portion of a leaf destroyed.

The contents, besides their value in an historical point of view,
are of interest in reference to the biographies of two such men as
Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins, both of whom perished in the
course of the enterprise to which the pamphlet relates.

                                                              J. P. C.




                             A LIBELL OF

                            Spanish Lies:

                             FOVND AT THE

               Sacke of Cales, discoursing the fight in
               the West INDIES, twixt the English Nauie
               being fourteene Ships and Pinasses, and
                a fleete of twentie saile of the king
                     of Spaines, and of the death
                       of _Sir Francis Drake_.

                With an answere briefely confuting the
      Spanish lies, and a short Relation of the fight according
            to truth, written by _Henrie Sauile_ Esquire,
              employed Captaine in one of her Maiesties
                 Shippes, in the same seruice against
                            the Spaniard.

          And also an Approbation of this discourse, by Sir
  _Thomas Baskeruile_, then Generall of the English fleete in that
       seruice: Auowing the maintenance thereof, personally in
          Armes against _Don Bernaldino_, if hee shall take
                  exceptions to that which is heere
                             set downe,

               Touching the fight twixt both Nauies, or
          iustifie that which he hath most falsely reported
                     in his vaine Printed letter.


                         Prouerb. 19. ver. 9.

        _A false witnes shall not bee vnpunished, and he that
                     speaketh lies shall perish._


                                LONDON

          Printed by _Iohn Windet_, dwelling by Pauls Wharfe
                at the signe of the Crosse Keyes, and
                     are there to be solde. 1596.


[Illustration: (An astrolabe)]




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  TO THE COVR-
  teous Reader.


_WHereas_, DON BERNALDINO DELGADILLO de AVELLANEDA, _Generall of the
Spanish fleete, hath by his Printed letters published to the worlde
diuers vntruthes, concerning our fleete and the Commaunders thereof,
seeking therby his owne glorie, and our disgrace; I haue taken vpon
me (though of many least able) to confute the same, the rather for
that the printed Coppie came first into my hands, hauing my selfe
beene Captaine of one of her Maiesties shippes in the same voyage:
Take this therfore (gentle Reader) as a token of my dutie and loue
to my Countrie and Countrie-men, And expect onely a plaine truth, as
from the pen of a Souldier, and Nauigator: Which if you take in good
parte, may draw me shortly to a greater labour, by publishing vnto
you our whole voyage._

                                                        Henrie Sauile.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


THe true Coppie of a letter found at the sacking of Cales, written
by _Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda_, Generall of the king
of Spaine his Nauie in the west _Indies_, sent vnto Doctor _Peter
Flores_, President of the Contraction house for the _Indies_, and
by him put in Print, with priueledge: wherein is declared manye
vntruthes, and false reports, tending to the disgrace of the seruice
of her Maiesties Nauie, and the Commaunders thereof, lately sent to
the west _Indies_, vnder the Commaund of _Sir Frances Drake_, and
_Sir Iohn Hawkins_ Generals at the Sea; and S_ir Thomas Baskeruile_
Generall at land: with a confutation of diuers grosse lies and
vntruthes, contayned in the same letter: together with a short
relation of the fight according to the truth.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]

  _COPIA DE VNA Carta, q̃ embio Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
  Auellaneda, General de la Armada de su Magestad, embiada al
  Doctor Pedro Florez Presidente de la casa de la Contratacion de
  las Yndias, en que trata del sucesso de la Armada de Ynglaterra,
  despues que pattio de Panama, de que fue por general Francisco
  Draque, y de su muerte._


DE Cartageua di cuenta a. V. m. como sali del puetto dela ciudad de
Lisbona, en busca de la armada Ynglesa, aunque por la mucha priessa,
ne se pudierou reparar tambien los Galeones como fuera necessario,
y conel tiempo se perdio uno, y por desgracia se quemo un Filibote,
y aviẽdo andado muchos dias en busca del enemigo, hasta que llegue
a Cartagena, donde auiendo tomado el parecer de Don Pedro de Acuna
Gouernador y capitan general de aquella ciudad, porque tenia mucha
necessidad de agua, y reparar los Nauios por que venian faltos della,
me detuue en aquel puerto, a doude tuve noticia por un Aniso, que
Francisco Draque murio en nombre de Dios, de pena de auer perdido
tantos Baxeles y gente, aunque despues se supo mas por estenso, y
aviẽdo dado a. V. m. cuenta de lo que hasta alli a sucedido agora
la doy de que sali de aquel puerto a dos de Março, y tome la derrota
de la Hauana, donde entendi hillarlo, y aviendo hecho la diligencia
posible. Lunes a onze del dicho mes, alas dos despues de medio dia,
al salir dela Ysla de Pinos, en la ensenada de Guaniguanico, tope cõ
el que yva con catorze Nauios muy buenos, fueme arrimãdo a el, aun
que tenia el viento por suyo, y el Almiranta q̃ yua mas al viento cõ
orros dos Nauios commenço arrimarsele, y aunque vino sobre ella con
todos los suyos tres vezes, no fue parte acei carsele para quequi
siesse enuestir, los que estaumos mas apartados fuymos dando bordos
acercandonos hasta jugar la artilleria, Mosqueteria, y Arcabuzeria
de los mas dellos, en lo qual el ricibio muy conocido dano, el lo
hiza con el artilleria como suele, y particularmente el Almiranta,
y en reconociendo la volũtad con que a el nos arrimauamos, con
mas diligencia de lo que se puede creer se desembaraço de todos
poniendose en huyda, dando las velas, dexando en le mar todas las
Lãchas que traya. Yo le segui con nueve Nauios toda la noche, y con
quatro mas todo el dia hasta hazerle doblar el cabo de san Anton, y
tomar la derrota de la Canal de Bahama conforme alas instruciones
de su Magestad, siruio de poco el verme con menos numero de Nauios,
ni todas las diligencias que se hizieron, para que se inclinase a
esperar ni abordar, ni tirar un Arcabuz, ni una pieça, porque el se
dlo la diligencia que pudo, porque sus Nauios los ania reduzido a
la mitad y los mejores, y estos acabaua de reparar en Puerto Belo,
donde se estuvo mas de quarenta dias, y ansi veniã muy reparados y
yo saque los mios desbaratados, que no me dio el tiepo lugar para
adereçarlos. A que nauego dos meses y medio, y traygo la capitana que
desde que parti de Cartagena no an parado las bombas, y el dia que
sali me ie arrimo ura Zabra con esta necessidad; la Almirãta y los
demas Nauios vienen conel mismo trabajo, perosin embargo, por lo que
yo vi en los enemigos; era muy conocida la ventaja que nos hazia, y
mucha dicha seria apoderarse del sino es hallarlo sobre el Ferro. Con
todo esso me an dexado un Nauio muy bueno en las manos con muy buena
gente, la qual dize como murio el Draq̃ en nombre de Dios y que va
por general dela dicha armada Ynglesa, el Coronel Quebraran, y por el
poco lugar que se a dado no an podido tomar: Agua; lena, ni carne,
y van de manera que no se como an de llegar a Ynglaterra. Entre
la gente deuen de ser ciento y quarenta, y quinze nobles capitanes
delo mejor de alli, y algunos ricos segun se echa de ver enellos. No
se ofrece otra cosa: nuestrose nõr guarde a. V. m. como puede y yo
desseo. Dela Hauana. 30. de Março; de 1 5 9 6. Años.

  _Don Bernaldino Dalgadillo
        de Auellaneda._


EL Licenciado Don Iuan Bermudes ê Figueroa, _T_enientemayor de
Assistente desta ciudad de Seuilla ysu tierra, que hago oficio de
Assistente della por ausencia, de su Señoria del Conde de Priego, Doy
licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera, para que pueda imprimir la Relaciõ
dela muerte de Francisco Draque. I a qual haga por dos meses, y por
ellos no lo imprima otro alguno. Sopena de diez mil marauedis para la
camara de su Magestad. Fecha en Seuilla a quinze de Mayo, de mil y
quinientos y nouenta y seys años.

  El Licenciado Don juan Bermudez
      e Figueroa.

                                             _Por su mandado
                                                 Gregoria Gutierrez.
                                                     Escriuano._


[Illustration: (banner, end of section)]




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


THE SPANISH

_Letter Englished_.

  The Coppye of a letter, which _Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
  Auellaneda_, General of the king of Spaine his Armie, sent vnto
  Doctor _Peter Flores_, President of the contraction house for the
  _Indies_, wherein hee maketh mention of the successe of the English
  Armie, after they departed from _Pannama_, wherof was General
  _Frances Drake_, and of his death.


_FRom_ Cartagena, _I gaue relation vnto you, how I departed from the
Cittie of_ Lisbone, _in the pursuite of the Englishe Armie: although
for the great hast the Gallions could not be so wel repaired as was
needfull, and with foule weather one was lost, and a Fly-boate was
burnt, and hauing sayled many daies in pursuite of the enemie, vntill
I arriued at_ Carthagena, _whereas hauing taken the aduise of_ Don
Pedro de Acunia, _Gouernour of the Cittie, and Captaine generall; for
wee had great neede of water, and to repaire our Shippes, we stayed
in that port, wheras I had intelligence by an_ Indian, _that_ Frances
Drake _dyed in_ Nombre de Dios, _for verie griefe that hee had lost
so many Barkes and men, as was afterwardes more manifestlye knowne:
And hauing giuen you a relation of all that happened hitherto: Now I
let you vnderstand, that I left this Port the second of March, and
toke our course towards the_ Hauana, _where I thought to haue founde
the English fleete, & also vsed all the diligence possible: vpon
Munday the eleauenth of the said Month, about two of the clocke in
the afternoone, at the issue of the Isle of_ Pinas, _in the entrance
of_ Guaniguanico, _I met with the English fleete, being fourteene
verie good Shippes, I drew towards them although they had the winde
of vs, & our Admirall who bore vp towardes the winde, with other
two Shippes began to draw neere them, and although we set thus
vppon them, three times with all their Shippes, yet would they not
set againe vppon vs, and those of our men which were farthest off
cryed to them amaine, being both within shot of Artillerie, Muskats
and Caliuers, whereby they receiued euident hurt by vs: They shot
off now & then at vs, and especially their Admirall, and seeing
our resolution how sharpe we were bent towards them, they with all
expedition and speede possible prepared to flie awaie, hoysing Sayles
and leauing their Oares for hast in the Sea: but I followed them,
with nine Shippes all the night following, and with fower more the
next daye, till I made them double_ Saint Antonies _point, and so I
tooke the course towards_ La Canet de Bahamet, _according to the
instructions from his Maiestie: It little auailed vs to bee seene,
with lesse number of Shippes, neither yet all the diligence we could
vse, could cause them to staye or come neere vs, nor to shoote off
one Hargabush or peece of Artillerie, for they fled away as fast as
they could, and their Shippes were wel diminished, and that the best
parte of them, the rest they repaired in the port_ Bella, _whereas
they were about fourtie daies before, and so by that meanes they were
all well repaired, and our Shippes verie foule, because the time
would not permit vs to trimme them: I haue sailed two Monethes and
a halfe in the Shippe called the_ Capitana, _sithence we departed
from_ Carthagena, _we haue not repaired their Pumps nor clensed
them: And the same daie I departed thence, my Shippes were all
foule with Barnacles, our Admirall and the rest of our Shippes haue
the like impediment, but no great hinderance vnto vs for ought I
could perceiue by our enemies: It is manifest what aduantage they
had of vs, and by no meanes was it possible for vs to take them,
vnlesse wee could haue come to deale with them with fire and sworde.
Neuerthelesse they left vs one good ship behind for our share, wel
manned, which tolde me that the_ Drake _dyed in_ Nombre de Dios, _and
that they haue made for Generall of the English fleete, the_ Colonell
Quebraran, _and also by meanes of the small time being streightly
followed by vs they had no opportunitie to take either water, woode
or flesh, and they are also in such bad case, that I know not how
they will bee able to arriue in_ England, _the number of men we haue
taken are about 140. and 15. Noble Captaines of their best sort, and
some of them rich, as well may appeare by their behauiour: I haue no
other thing to write at this time. Our Lord keepe you who best can, &
as I desire. From the_ Hauana _the 30. of March. 1596_

                                             Don Bernaldino Delgadillo
                                                   de Auellaneda.


THE _Licenciat Don Iohn Barmudes_ of _Figueroa_ Leiuetenant of the
Assistantes of the Cittie of _Cyuill_, and the prouince thereof, who
doth supplie the Office of the Assistaunt in the absence of the
Right Honourable the _Earle_ of _Priego_. Giue license to _Roderigo
de Cabriera_ to Imprint the Relation of the death of _Fraunces
Drake_, which onely he may doe for two Monthes, and no other to
Imprint the same within the saide terme, vpon paine of ten thousand
Marauedis for his Maiesties Chamber. Giuen in _Cyuill_ the 15. of
May. 1 5 9 6.

                                    The Licenciat Don Iohn Bermudes of
                                        Figueroa.

                                             _By his Assigne_ Gregorie
                                                Gutierrez _Notarie._


[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]

THis letter of the Generall _Don Bernaldino_ sent into _Spaine_
declaring the death of _Sir Fraunces Drake_ and their supposed
victorie; was altogether receiued for an vndoubted truth, and so
pleasing was this newes vnto the _S_paniard, that there was present
cõmandement giuen to publish the letter in Print, that all the
people of S_paine_ might be partakers of this common ioy: The which
letter Printed in _Cyuill_, bearing date the xv. of May, 1596. came
to the hands of _Henrie Sauile_ Esquire who being employed in that
seruice for the west _Indies_, and Captaine of her Maiesties good
Shippe the _Aduenture_, vnder the conduct of S_ir Fraunces Drake_,
and _Sir Iohn Hawkins_, Hath caused the said Printed letter to bee
translated into English. And that the impudencie of the Spanish
Generall may the more plainely appeare, the said _Henrie Sauile_ doth
answere particularly to euerie vntruth in the same letter contained,
as heereafter followeth.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


THE

ANSWERE TO

The Spanish letter.

  _First whereas the Generall doth say, that_ Fraunces Drake _dyed
  at_ Nombre de Dios, _as he had intelligence by an Indian._


[Sidenote: _The Generals first newes, and his best news is in part
lying newes._]

[Sidenote: _The Generall seemeth to wante friendes in Courte, sending
such great newes to a priuate Doctor._]

THe Generall sente this newes into his Country cõfirmed with his
hand and seale of Armes: It is the first newes in his letter, and
it was the best newes that he could send into _Spaine_. For it did
ease the stomackes of the timerous Spaniardes greatly to heare of
the death of him, whose life was a scourge & continuall plague vnto
them: But it was a pointe of great simplicitie, & scarcely beseeming
a Generall, to tie the credite of his reporte locally to any place
vppon the report of a silly _Indian_ slaue. For it had beene
sufficient to haue said, that _Fraunces Drake_ was certainly dead,
without publishing the lye in Print, by naming _Nombre de Dios_: for
it is most certaine _Sir Fraunces Drake_ dyed twixt the Island of
_Scouda_, and _Porte-bella_: But the Generall being rauished with
the suddaine ioy of this report as a man that hath escaped a great
daunger of the enemie, doeth breake out into an insolent kind of
bragging of his valour at Sea, and heaping one lye vpon another, doth
not cease vntill he hath drawne them into sequences, and so doth
commende them vnto _Peter_ the Doctor, as censour of his learned
worke.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  _Secondly, The general doth write vnto the doctor, that_ Frances
  Drake _dyed for verie griefe that hee had lost so many Barkes and
  men._

[Sidenote: _Don Bernaldino doth lye impudently._]

[Sidenote: _The successe of the kings fiue Frigots._]

[Sidenote: _The certain cause wherof Sir Frances Drake dyed._]

A _T_hing verie strange that the General or the _Indian_, who hee
doth vouch for his lye, should haue such speculation in the bodye of
him whome they neuer saw, as to deliuer for truth vnto his Countrie,
the verie cause or disease whereof hee dyed: And this second report
of his is more grosse then the first. For admit the mistaking of the
place might bee tollerable; notwithstanding, this precise affirming
the cause of his death, doth manifestly prooue that the Generall
doth make no conscience to lye. And as concerning the losse of any
Barkes or men in our Nauie, by the valour of the Spaniard before S_ir
Fraunces Drake_ his death, wee had none (one small Pinnesse excepted)
which we assuredly know was taken by chaunce falling single into a
fleete of fiue Frigots (of which was Generall, _Don Pedro Telio_,)
neere vnto the Island of _Dominico_, and not by the valour of _Don
Bernaldino_: the which fiue Frigots of the Kings afterwards had but
ill successe, for one of them we burnt in the harbour of S. _Iohn
Portrico_, and one other was sunck in the same harbour, and the
other three were burnt amongst many other Shippes at the taking of
_Cales_: This I thinke in wise mens iudgements, will seeme a seely
cause to mooue a man sorrowe to death. For true it is, S_ir Fraunces
Drake_ dyed of the Flixe which hee had growne vppon him eight daies
before his death, and yeelded vp his spirite like a Christian to his
creatour quietly in his Cabbin. And when the Generall shall suruey
his losses, he shall finde it more then the losse of the English,
and the most of his destroyed by the Bullet: But the death of _Sir
Fraunces Drake_ was of so great comfort vnto the Spaniard, that it
was thought to be a sufficient amendes, although their whole fleete
had beene vtterly lost.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  _Thirdly, The generall doth say of his owne credite, and not by
  intelligence from any_ Indian _or other, that on the eleauenth of
  March last hee met the English fleete at the Isle of_ Pinas, _being
  fourteene good Shippes, who although they had the winde of him,
  yet hee set vppon them three times with all their Shippes, but the
  English fleete flled, and refused to fight shooting now and then a
  shot, but especially the Admirall._

[Sidenote: _A payre of of Spanish Lyers._]

[Sidenote: _The Spanish Viceadmirall a man of vallour._]

[Sidenote: _The number of the Spanish Shippes after the fight._]

THis third lye of the Generall _Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
Avellaneda_, (whose name for the prolixitie thereof maye be drawne
somwhat neere the length of a Cable) hath no colour of protection,
but it hath a iust proportion in measure to the lyes of olde
_Barnardino de Mendozza_ his Countrieman, concerning the ouerthrow of
her Maiesties Nauie in the yeare 1588. for except _Don Barnaldino_
the Generall, did purpose to winne the whetstone from _Don Barnardino
de Mendozza_ the olde Spanish lyer: I cannot coniecture why hee
should write to his Countrie for a truth, that hee chased the
English Nauye with nine Shippes, and did three seuerall times giue
the onset to the English fleete, who being fourteene good Shippes
(as he saith) did flye and refuse to fight, being that the Spanish
Viceadmiral (if he be liuing) and manye other, can witnesse the
contrarie, who fighting like a true valiant man, departed from the
fight with a torne and battered Shippe to saue her from sinking.
Neither can I imagine that there is any one in the _S_panish fleete
(_Don Bernaldino_ excepted) that will saye they were lesse then
twentie sayle of Shipps when they met the English fleet: And the
Spanish Nauy can witnesse that they receiued such store of Bullets
from the English fleete, that they were glad to depart, and in
despight of them the English Nauie did holde their determined course:
And taking a view of the Spanish fleete the next day, their number
was not aboue thirteene Shippes, which did argue that they were
either sunke, or fled to harbour to saue themselues.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  _Fourthly, The generall saith, that the English fleete fled awaye,
  and left their Oares for haste behind them in the Sea._

[Sidenote: _This lie was made in the Generals owne forge._]

[Sidenote: _A commendation of the Generall_]

[Sidenote: _The Generall doth practise to lye, for recreation._]

IT was strange that they shoulde leaue behinde them Oares in the
Sea, being there was not in the English fleete either Gally or
gallyasse, which required the vse of Oares, as for the Oares of
their ship-boates and other such small vessels, they had stoed them
aboarde their Shippes, and were no impediment vnto them, but most
necessarie for them to vse, and therfore not likely they would cast
them ouerboard: But it is most likely, that the Generall fell into
some pleasant dreame at Sea, wherein hee did see a false apparition
of victorie against the English, & for lacke of matter did set this
downe in his letter for newes to his countrie: It is sinne to belye
the Deuill, and therefore the Generall shal haue his right, the
letter is so well contriued, (and yet with no great eloquence) but
with such art, that ther are not many more lines, then there are
lyes, which sheweth that there are wonderfull and extraordinarie
gifts in the Generall: But I am perswaded if _Don Bernaldino_ had
thought that his letter should haue beene Printed, hee woulde haue
omitted many thinges contained in the letter, for the Doctor did
vse him somwhat hardly in shewing the letter openly, and more in
suffering it to be Printed: for friends may like good fellowes send
lyes one to the other for recreation, and feed their friends with
some small taste thereof, so it be kept close, without danger to
incurre the tytle of a lying Generall: But as the matter is now
handled throgh the simplycitie of the Doctor, I cannot see but the
General _Don Bernaldino_, is like to carrie the tytle equally twixt
both his shoulders.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  _Fiftly, The generall doth say in his Printed letter, that
  notwithstanding all the diligence he could vse, hee coulde not
  cause the English fleete to staie nor come neere them, nor
  discharge one Hargebush or peece of Artillerie, but fled away as
  fast as they could._

[Sidenote: _The torne sides of the Spanish Shippes doe condemne Don
Bernaldino of lying._]

[Sidenote: _Note the valoure of Don Bernaldino._]

[Sidenote: _The order of the English Nauie._]

[Sidenote: _The Spaniard cannot bragge of his gaine._]

[Sidenote: _Spanish bragges are of no value with the English._]

ANd this lie also he doth not receiue by intelligence from any
other, but himselfe was an eye-witnesse in the action, which made
him bold to send this with the rest into his Countrie for currant
newes: But herein _Don Bernaldino_ was more bolde then wise, for the
torne and battered sides of his Gallyons, being compared with her
Maiestes Shippes; and others that serued in that fight, doe declare,
that his Ships receiued at least two bullets for one. Neither can
it be concealed but his owne Countriemen (if any do fauour truth)
may easily see the losse, and late reparations, done vnto the Kings
fleete sithence they did encounter with the English Nauie, whensoeuer
they that remaine shall arriue in S_paine_: But the Generall seemeth
to bee a verye good proficient in his profession, and waxeth
somewhat bolde, treading the true steppes of old _Barnardino de
Mendozza_, and yet _Mendozza_ was somewhat more warie in his lyes,
for he had sometime the colour of intelligence to shadow them, but
the Generall growing from boldnes to impudencie, maketh no scruple
to say, that the English Nauie fled as fast as they could without
discharging any Hargebush or peece of Artillerie, when as the
battered sides of his ships do returne the lye to his face: For in
this conflict _Don Bernaldino_ did behaue himselfe so valiantly,
that he was alwaies farthest of in the fight, & had so great care of
his owne person that he stoode cleare frõ the danger of Muskat or
any smal shot, & durst not approach, whereas our generall was the
foremost, & so held his place, vntill by order of fight other ships
were to haue their turnes, according to his former direction, who
wisely & pollitickly had so ordered his vangarde, & reregarde, that
as the maner of it was altogether strange to the Spaniard, so might
they haue bene without all hope of victorie, if their General had
beene a man of any iudgement in Sea fights: I know no reason why
the English Nauie should flye from him, for the Spaniard may put
all the gaine in his eye that euer he did winne from the English:
Peraduenture some siely nouice of our country meeting the general in
S_paine_, and hearing a repetition of so many sillables in one name,
as _Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda_, might thinke them to
be words of Coniuration, & for feare of raysing a Spirit, might flie
from him as from the Deuill, or some simple _Indian_ slaue hearing
the like repetition of his long and tedious name, might suppose it
to be an Armie of Spaniards, and for feare runne awaye: But the
commaunders and Captaines of the English Nauie, were men of such
resolution, that no Spanish bragges coulde dismaye them, for they
haue often met them with their Pikes in their Spanish beardes. Nor
the countenaunce of _Don Bernaldino_ quaile them, although he were
acowtred in his gilt Leather buskins, and his Toledo Rapyer.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  _Sixtly, The generall saith in his letter, that notwithstanding
  their flying away so fast, the English left them one good Shippe
  well manned, who told him that the_ Drake _dyed in_ Nombre de Dios,
  _in which Shippe were one hundred and fourtie men, and fifteene
  noble Captaines of the best sorte._

[Sidenote: _Don Bernaldino very resolute._]

[Sidenote: _The Indian slaue, is the best shadow, to the Generals
lye._]

[Sidenote: _Don Bernaldino his rare gift in coyning a new and
straunge name._]

[Sidenote: _The Generals storehouse of lyes._]

[Sidenote: _The schoolemen of modestie do vse this kinde of
reprehension, when they doe thinke the Author to erre._]

[Sidenote: _The difference twixt Quebraran and Baskeruile._]

[Sidenote: _The Generall conuicted of lying and forgery._]

[Sidenote: _The Generall maketh great brags in taking a distressed
Ship, which is supposed not to strike one blow._]

[Sidenote: _The fifteene noble Captaines according the generals lying
occupation, will proue but three._]

[Sidenote: _The Printing of the letter doth shame the Generall._]

[Sidenote: _Don Bernaldino of an excellent complexion._]

[Sidenote: _The first discouery of the Generals Printed letter._]

[Sidenote: _The Generals great skill in amplifying._]

THe Generall _Don Bernaldino_, like a resolute Spaniarde hauing
alreadye gonne ouer his shoes, maketh no dannger to wade ouer his
Boates also: and as hee hath begun so he doth conclude, I maruaile
that hee did not in writing his discourse remember this olde saying;
that is, A lyar ought to haue a good memorie: It were much better
for him in mine opinion to reuoke the testimonie which hee saith he
had from the Englishmen, concerning S_ir Fraunces Drake_ his death
at _Nombre de Dios_, and stande to the intelligence receiued from
the siely _Indian_ slaue, as it appeareth in his first lye, for
without al doubt, there is no Englishman that wil say (if he haue
his right sences) that he dyed at _Nombre de Dios_, for they all
knowe the contrarie: Neither can the Generall avouch that he receiued
intelligence from any English man, that after the death of _Sir
Fraunces Drake_ they did elect for Generall _Colonell Quebraran_,
as he doth most falsly affirme in the latter end of his vaine and
friuolous letter, being that the name was straunge, and vnknowne to
any in the English Nauie. Neither doe I imagine that any of those
which the General saith he hath taken were so forgetfull as not to
remember their generals name. But without all doubt this addition
of so new, and straunge a name to the English Generall, doth proue
that _Don Bernaldino_ is not vnfurnished of a forge & storehouse
of lyes, from whence as from an euerflowing fountaine, he sendeth
forth lyes of al sorts sufficient for his owne store, and greate
plentie to furnish his friends: The General was much beholding to
his godfathers who gaue him the name _Barnaldino_, which we in
English do take to be plaine _Barnard_, which name hath as it were
a kind of priueledge from being sharply reprehended when the party
is thought to erre: for it is a common saying amongst the Schoolemen
that _Barnardus non videt omnia_, viz. _Barnard_ seeth not all
thinges, (when he doth dissent from their opinions) the which fauour
wee coulde bee content to yeelde to _Bernaldino_ for the name sake,
if he were not taken with so many manifest and impudent lies,
neither doe I thinke that _Signior Bernaldino_ will say that he saw
all that he hath written, be it spoken in councell for shaming the
General, for is there any man so voide of reason as to thinke? That
any Englishman being demaunded of his Generals name, would write or
speake _Quebraran_ for _Baskeruile_, so much difference there is
in the sound of the sillables, as there is no affinitie at all, or
likelihoode of truth: But such are the Generals rare gifts, (be it
spoken to his small praise) that we Englishmen must of force confesse
that the Generall hath giuen a proude onset to carrie the whetstone
from _Signior Barnardino de Mendozza_: Neither will the 140. men &
15. noble Captaines (which hee saith hee did take, of whome he might
haue beene rightly informed of their generals name) acquit him of
lying forgerie, for giuing the name of _Quebraran_ to the English
Generall: as for the good Shippe well manned, which he saith the
English left them after the fight, I am perswaded hee hath no man
to witnesse that lye, for the ship was seperated by weather from
the English fleete in the night thirteene daies before the fight,
with the Spanish Nauie, & neuer to anye mans knowledge came more in
sight of the English fleete, if the Spanish Shippes by chaunce did
take the said wel manned Shippe (as they cal her) I doubt not but
they haue the Shippe, the 140. men, and the 15. noble Captaines to
shew: But euermore I gesse the Spanish reckoning will fall short when
it is examined, for the fifteene noble Captaines will proue (as I
take it) but three, whose losse I grieue to thinke on: Neither did
the _S_paniards gaine them by valour, or we loose or leaue them for
cowardise, as most vntruely this bragging lyer hath certified. But
the Generall like a prouident man, to make his fame and credite the
greater with his Prince and country, doth take vpon him (amongst
other his miracles perfourmed before the English fleet) by way of
amplification to make small matters seeme great, as a little shoe
to serue a great foote, and finding that it can hardly be brought
to passe, he doth stretch the Leather with his teeth that it is
ready to breake, and notwithstanding, all this will not serue his
purpose, for the Printing of the letter doth marr the play, and
bringeth such matter in question, as the Generall doth wish might be
concealed, and were he not of so dry and cholericke complexion, as
commonly Spaniards are, he would blush for very shame in publishing
so impudently such manifest vntruthes. For sithence his meeting with
the English fleet at the Isle of _Pinas_, there hath beene by the
worthie English Generals, an honourable expedition from England into
the Continent of Spaine, where amongst other exploits hauing taken
the Cittie of _Cales_, in the sacke thereof was found some of _Don
Bernaldino_ his Printed letters: & comming to the hands of a Captaine
that serued in the voyage to the west _Indies_, he hath thought
very fit (in regard of the slaunders to the English Nauie contained
in the saide letter) to quote the errors, that the truth onely
may appeare, to all such as haue a desire to bee rightly informed
of such accidents, as befell thẽ in this late voyage to the west
_Indies_: and this may suffice to shew _Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
Avellaneda_ his greate iudgement in amplyfying small matters, or of
nothing to make in shewe seeme somewhat. And now hauing thus farre
informed you of the truth in reproofe of the slaunderous, false, and
vntrue reports of this glorious lying Generall, with a true disproofe
to some of the grossest of his lyes, I will leaue him with the rest
of his lying letter, and the circumstances therein contained to your
censures: who in discretion may easily discerne the same. And haue
heere following plainely and truely set downe the course and order of
our whole fight after we met.




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


THE MEETING Of our English Nauie and the _Spanish fleete, and the
order_ of our encounter.


[Sidenote: _The first discouerie of the Spanish fleete._]

[Sidenote: _The incounter twixt the English and the Spanish Ships._]

[Sidenote: _The Spanish Viceadmiral can witnesse, what success they
had in this fight._]

[Sidenote: _The English Admirall carried his Creset light,
notwithstanding the enemie was vppon his brode side._]

[Sidenote: _The English receiued little losse in this conflict._]

[Sidenote: _The remainder of the Spanish fleete were but thirteene
sayles._]

MVnday the first of _March_, according to our computation, wee scryed
the Iland of _Pinas_, wher haling in for the westerne parte thereof,
thinking there to haue watered, being within fower leagues of it
Southerly, we sent in three of our Pinnasses to discouer the harbour,
and to sounde afore vs, about one of the clocke in the afternoone;
the same day we discouered a fleete of twentie sayles, and deeming
them to bee the _S_panish fleete, wee kept our loofe to get the
winde, but their Viceadmiral with diuers other ships went about to
cut off our Pinnasses, so that our Generall with some other of our
Shippes, was forced to tacke about vpon the larbour tacke, and so
ranne in towards the land keeping the winde, so as we recouered our
Pinnasses, which forced the enemies Shippes to tacke about, and to
take the aide of their fleete, and being come neere vnto them they
shot at vs, wee still approched, hauing our close fights vp, our
flagges, ensignes and streamers displayed, our men orderly placed
in each quarter, but forbare our fight vntill our Generall began,
and gaue vs warning to come in and fight, by shooting off a great
peece, according to his former directions, so being within Muskat
shot, the Viceadmirall of the Spanish fleete came neerest vnto vs,
to whom our Viceadmirall _Iohn Traughton_ Captaine of the _Elizabeth
Bonaduenture_ gaue fight, betwixt whome there was the greatest volee
of small shot changed that lightly hath bene heard at Sea, which
cõtinued a long halfe hower. In which time the Spanish fleete
came into fight, our Generall S_ir Thomas Baskeruile_ being in the
_Garland_, whereof _Humphrey Reignolds_ was Captaine, being the next
Shippe vnto the _Elizabeth Bonaduenture_, bare vp to the enemie,
playing with her great Ordinance hotly vntill she came within Muskat
shot: _Ionas Bodenham_ Captaine of the _Defiance_, and _Henrie
Sauile_ Captaine of the _Aduenture_, came likewise into fight with
thẽ: After the _Garland_ (being within Muskat shot) played her part
and made good fight for the space of an hower. The _Defiance_ bare
vp likewise and had her turne, after came the _Aduenture_ again
within Muskat shot, who hauing chaunged many a great Bullet, with
them before, renewed his fight, and continued it an hower with small
shot. Then came _Thomas Drake_ Captaine of the _Hope_, who last of
all had his turne. Thus had all the _Queenes_ Shippes their course:
The Marchants Shippes with other small vessels being without the
_Queenes_ Shippes shot when they saw opportunitie: After the enemie
finding no good to be done, (being well beaten) fell from vs, the
_Aduenture_, playing vppon them with her great Ordinaunce, made three
of the last shot at them: Their Viceadmiral with diuers others of
their Ships, were so beaten, that they left off the fight, and were
forced to lye in the winde, for that they durst not lye of either
board by reason of their many and great Leakes, which they had
receiued by our greate shot. _T_he Generall with the rest of their
fleete, tacking about fell in our wake, thinking to get the winde,
which in the beginning we sought to hinder. But our General seeing
that in holding the winde we should shoote our selues into the Bay,
gaue them the winde. All that night they kept themselues vppon our
broade side, notwithstanding our Admirall carryed his Cresset light
all night: hauing greate care of our smallest Shippes: This fight
continued about fower howers til it was neere night, in the which
fight, thanks be to God, there was slaine so fewe persons of our
English fleete as I thinke the like conflict hath not beene performed
with so little losse of men: What harme befell the Spaniards in
their fleete I leaue to your iudgements. Yet our eyes can witnesse
their Shippes were sore beaten and raked thorough, whereby there
was such falling backe and lying by the Lee to stoppe their leakes,
as some of them were driuen to haste awaye, and rather to runne on
shore to saue themselues then sincke in the Sea: Besides within two
howers after our fight with them, wee saw one of their great Shippes
on fire which burnt into the Sea, and all the Sterne of another of
their Shippes blowen vp: And in the morning a Shippe of our fleete
was runne so neere the land, that to double the Cape current hee must
of necessitie tacke about & fall in the wake of the enemie, which
caused our Generall in the _Garland_ and the _Defiance_ to tacke
about, which two ships forced the three _S_hippes of the enemies
which were put forth to take our Shipp, (or else to cause her runne
on grounde) to returne to their fleete to saue themselues, hoysing
all their sayles for haste: This morning they were faire by vs hauing
the winde of vs, being but thirteene sayle of their twentie to be
seene, then we stroke our toppe sayles thinking to haue fought with
them again, which they perceiuing tacked about from vs, & after that
neuer durst nor would come neere vs: What became of the rest of their
fleet we know not, but true it was that they were in great distresse
mightily beaten and torne, by hauing receiued many Bullets from vs.
All this day wee had sight of them, but they shewed little will to
fight or come neere vs, so we keeping our course west, and by North,
about sixe of the clocke at night lost the sight of them. And this is
a true discourse of our fight with the Spanish fleete. The which the
Author heereof will iustifie with the aduentrue of his life, against
any Spaniard seruing in that action, that shal contradict the same.


                              _FINIS._


                                                      _Henrie Sauile._


[Illustration: (banner, end of section)]




[Illustration: (banner, start of section)]


  THOMAS BAS-
  KERVILE KNIGHT,
  His approbation
  to this Booke.


I Thomas Baskeruile _Knight, Generall of her Maiesties late Indian
armado in the late conflict had betweene the Spanish fleete and
vs, hauing perused the Spanish letter written by_ Don Bernaldino
Delgadillo de Auellaneda, _General of the King of Spaines Nauie, and
also hauing perused Captaine_ Henry Sauile _his answeres vnto the six
exceptions in the Generals letter with his discourse of the manner
of our fight with the Spanish fleete, do say, that the said_ Henrie
Sauile _hath answered the letter, and set downe the order of the
fight sincerely according to truth, for testimonie of which I haue
hereunto set my hand._

_And if_ Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda _the General
shal take any exceptions to this my approbation, or stand in the
iustification of his lying letter written to Doctor_ Peter Flores,
_President of the Contraction house for the_ Indies, _and by him for_
Bernaldinoes _glorie lately put in Printe: I then saye that hee
falsely lyed, and that I will maintaine against him with whatsoeuer
Armes he shall make choyce of. And because the kingdomes wherein we
abide are enemies, by reason of which there is no meanes in either
of them, to maintaine that I haue written. Let him make choice of
any indifferent kingdome, of equall distance from either Realme, and
I will there be ready to maintaine as much as I haue written: But
if by my imployments into Fraunce, I be so stayed by her Maiesties
Commaundementes, that I cannot out of that Realme meete him in anye
other, I cannot see why hee shoulde take anye exception to that,
considering the equalitie of the place, and that the Armies of both
our Princes be there resident._


                               FINIS.

                                                             Tho. B.


[Illustration: (ship under sail, end of book)]


[LONDON: F. SHOBERL, PRINTER, 51, RUPERT STREET, HAYMARKET.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIBELL OF SPANISH LIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


