The Project Gutenberg eBook of Easy money
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Easy money

Author: Bertrand W. Sinclair

Release date: August 5, 2023 [eBook #71348]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Street & Smith Publications

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EASY MONEY ***





                               EASY MONEY

                        By Bertrand W. Sinclair

         Author of “Hands Off!” “The Land of Frozen Suns,” Etc.


    When Charlie Shaw, the carefree cow-puncher, was accused of
    being a shallow josher, and therefore worthless for rounding
    up cow thieves, Charlie got angry and proved that even a
    “kidder” can get down to business.

The cool autumn wind riffled across Lonesome Prairie. It fluttered the
manes and tails of a dozen saddled horses standing in a compact group,
awaiting the pleasure of their riders, who stood and squatted in various
postures, casting occasional glances at a number of flat, wrinkled
objects in the grass of a tiny hollow. They had come upon these objects
quite unexpectedly and had stopped to examine them. One rider had gone
galloping back toward camp. The rest waited.

“Gosh, old Elmer’ll go straight in the air when he sees this,” one
remarked.

Two miles distant a herd was stringing south. Heavy-loaded wagons,
tooled respectively by a cook and a night herder, with a comet’s tail of
saddle stock following behind, bore in the same direction. And from that
direction three men were now riding full tilt toward the dismounted
cow-punchers.

When they pulled up at the group, Elmer Duffy gave an immediate
exhibition of what his rider had termed “going straight in the air.”
Elmer was past forty, a sandy-haired Texan, with a capacity for
irritable conduct that remained mostly hidden beneath a placid exterior.
He had a long, solemn face. He took his position as the active head of a
big cow outfit rather more seriously than range bosses usually did. This
attitude, together with his slumbering crabbedness, did not make him
popular with his men.

“What’s all this?” he demanded.

“Well,” one sunny-faced young fellow explained, “as near as we can see,
it’s eight beef hides with the Seventy-seven brand, that’s been skinned
off their rightful wearers and laid out to dry in the sun by some kind
soul. We happened on ’em an’ sent Mike back to tell you, because we
thought maybe you’d be interested.”

Mr. Duffy prowled from one hide to the other. The skulls and shin bones
and hoofs of the defunct animals were scattered about for all and sundry
to behold, where the coyotes had gnawed them. But they knew very well
that neither wolf nor coyote had pulled down a bunch of mature cattle
like that. And, as the foreman of the Seventy-seven gathered the import
of these remains, he grew red in the face, and his language became
eloquent but unprintable.

“Some dirty thieves has been butcherin’ beef an’ gettin’ away with it,”
he stormed. “I’d give five hundred dollars cold cash to lay hands on
’em.”

“If you’d advertise that in the _River Press_,” the same youngster
laughed, “maybe they’d come in and give themselves up for the reward.”

Elmer glared at him.

“Don’t get fresh,” he growled. “This here’s serious.”

“So it seems,” Charlie Shaw replied carelessly. “But there’s no law
against joshin’.”

“This ain’t no josh,” Duffy declared, embellishing his statement with an
earnest oath. “And I suppose all a man can expect when he finds that a
bunch of thieves is loose on the range is for featherheads like you to
make a joke of it. If it was your cattle that’d been killed, you’d sing
a different tune.”

Charlie Shaw’s laughing mouth shut in a tight line.

“I would, Elmer,” he said quietly. “I’d keep my mouth shut and go after
’em. I wouldn’t waste my breath cussin’.”

“_You_ wouldn’t waste your breath cussin’!” Elmer exploded. “No! All you
c’n waste is the outfit’s time an’ your money at poker. If I had to
depend on boneheads like you to protect the outfit’s interests, the
Seventy-seven would go to hell in two seasons. Josh--that’s all you know
how to do.”

Charlie took a step toward him. He was tall and slim, older in years and
experience than his boyish face told, and his merry blue eyes suddenly
ceased to be merry.

“Don’t get too personal in your remarks, Elmer,” he warned. “I might get
serious myself.”

“Personal! Personal!” Duffy bellowed. “Say, lemme tell you somethin’.”

As an offset to his unfortunate disposition, Elmer Duffy had a
reasonable amount of common sense; otherwise, he could not have guided
the destiny of the Seventy-seven. He realized that he _had_ got too
personal. And he couldn’t back down without losing face. He had no high
opinion of Charlie Shaw’s intelligence. No serious-minded man ever has a
high opinion of light-minded youth, and Charlie had been the play boy of
the Seventy-seven all that summer--a competent enough range rider, with
no proper sense of responsibility, according to Elmer. But Shaw had
nerve. His record and his actions made even Elmer Duffy concede that.
And Elmer didn’t hunger for war over a mere matter of levity.

“You go onto the wagon,” he said stiffly, refusing to pursue the
contention farther. “Catch your horses, pack your bed, and we’ll part
company. Here’s your time.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

He disregarded Charlie’s palpably belligerent attitude, sat himself on
the grass, drew a check book and indelible pencil from his pocket, and
proceeded to write out a check.

“You drew most all you had comin’ last trip,” he said, as he handed over
the green slip. “There’s the balance.”

“So you think I’m a bonehead, do you?” Charlie inquired gravely. “I
wonder if I couldn’t sort of change your mind about that.”

“I don’t want to have no fuss with you, Shaw,” Elmer said curtly. “I
can’t have a man in the outfit I don’t hitch with. You’re young an’
careless an’ hot-headed an’----”

“An’ you’re middle-aged an’ staggerin’ under a tremendous weight of
responsibility an’ cranky as a bull with the seven-year itch,” Shaw
retorted. “I don’t give a damn about you firin’ me, Elmer. But nobody
can talk to me----”

A couple of men horned in between them. Everybody in the crew liked
Charlie Shaw. They respected Duffy, even if they didn’t love him. No one
wanted to see a fuss over nothing. And they could see the making of a
powder fog in that unexpected clash born of irritation and a loose
tongue. They twisted Charlie Shaw about and spoke soothingly to him.
While they strove with his outraged dignity, Elmer Duffy, exercising
uncommonly good judgment, mounted his horse and issued orders.

Thereafter Charlie could only let it go as it stood, or make himself
ridiculous by insisting on a ruction with a man who patently desired to
avoid one. Duffy could indicate his distaste without having his nerve
questioned.

But when the dozen riders were bobbing away in a row, Charlie sat on his
horse, disconsolate, indignant and still resentful.

“Darn his hide,” he reflected. “I was just about to tangle with him, I
guess. By gosh, I’ll make him sing a different tune yet. Bonehead? Huh!
Thinks I don’t know enough to come in out of the rain. Just because I
pushed him over some beefed steers. Gosh darn him, I _will_ show him.”

Just how, Charlie hadn’t the remotest idea. The present occasion did not
look particularly auspicious. The drama of an old range song flitted
unpleasantly through Charlie’s mind:

    Heaps of fun in the summertime,
      Pockets full of gold.
    But when you’re broke in the wintertime,
      Oh, mister, ain’t it cold!

A raw October wind whistled mournfully across Lonesome Prairie. Charlie
thought regretfully of the celebrated poker game in which he had
recently dropped practically a summer’s wages. Round-up was nearly over.
The big outfits seldom took on men in the fall. Oh--well. But he would
certainly show Elmer Duffy he could do something besides taking life as
a perpetual joke.

Even a natural clown has his serious moments.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Darkness on the plains is like darkness on the sea. If the stars are
hidden there is no guiding mark--nothing but an immensity of shrouded
silence in which a rider is like a ship without a compass. Yet men cast
away at sea in open boats win to a landfall by day or night. Men cross
the plains when night spreads her ebony wings and do not miss their
destination. Each has his own resources of location and direction; the
mariner by dead reckoning, based on observation of wind and heaving
swells at sundown, the plainsman by his knowledge of the roll of the
ground and the directional trend of gently undulating slopes. The rider
feels these under the feet of his horse, as the seaman feels the lift
and fall of his vessel.

So Charlie, crossing alone a forty-mile stretch of Lonesome Prairie, was
as sure of his course as if bright day had shown him the Sweet Grass in
the north, the blue summit of the Bear Paws on the eastern sky line, and
the dark broken line to the south, where Marias Valley cut the plains.
He rode at a jog trot, bearing south, always south, toward a ranch he
knew, although the cloud rack in the sky darkened the plains, so that
the outstretched fingers of a hand were scarcely visible.

He had fifteen miles yet to go, if he had not miscalculated. Nowhere in
the stretch he had covered was there any great difference in elevation.
It was all flat, with scarcely perceptible hollows bearing away to the
east, toward Lonesome Prairie Lake. But he approached now a terrain of
less monotony, and he began to peer ahead for a well-known beacon,
something akin to that which guided the Israelites on an historical
occasion, a pillar of fire by night.

Scarcely exact to call it a pillar. It was no more than a flickering
gleam--an uncanny momentary glow. It came from an exposed surface seam
of lignite coal, mysteriously set on fire long ago and burning still in
the bowels of the earth. In the dark, flame and ignited gas would
regularly flare about the pit, a ghostly incandescence, flashing
intermittently above the smoldering embers of the burning seam.

He marked it, at last, well ahead and a little to the right. He let the
reins dangle loosely. The black horse he bestrode had been bred and
broken in the Marias Valley. He would bear straight south, now, at a
steady, smooth trot.

“I expect,” he muttered to the beast’s dim ears, “you know we’re headed
for the TL, like the feller who went home when there was no place else
to go, eh, Crepe? You wouldn’t, bein’ a one-ideaed animal, think of
headin’ back for the Seventy-seven round-up. Well, go to it, old boy.”

Out of the dark a strange whispering sound arose. At first, Charlie took
it to be the wind springing up again. Yet his ears no more than caught
the sound, than he knew it was no wind rustling across the prairie. He
pulled up. It sounded plainer, then--not so far ahead of him; it was
unaccountable, mysterious, beyond identification. The curious fancy came
to Charlie that it was like a giant snake crawling on its belly over the
stiff dry grass. And that bit of imagery made him smile. Pythons in the
jungle night! And the largest reptile in Montana was a four-foot
rattlesnake.

But that whispering sound stirred his curiosity to a great pitch. He had
not the remotest idea what caused it, and he was familiar with every
legitimate noise a man might expect to hear anywhere on the plains after
nightfall--the rush of wind, the sound of running water, the thunder of
hoofs, insect voices, the tumult of a herd, or the tiniest stirring.

And, as he sat his horse, wondering what it could possibly be, the sound
died away to nothing.

He shook up his horse. The pack animal came up on a slack rope. A
hundred yards straight ahead Crepe shied and snorted violently.

“Now, what the dickens!” Charlie exclaimed testily. “You darned fool!
What’s eatin’ you?”

He was tired. These coltish antics from a staid old cow horse annoyed
him. He spoke this annoyance aloud. He jabbed Crepe chastisingly with
his spurs. Leather creaked. The bit chains and spur rowels clanked. The
black horse’s hoofs thudded sharply on the hard ground, as he plunged
under the prick of the rowels. Charlie swore.

                   *       *       *       *       *

In that still air a man’s voice carried a long way. There was nothing he
could see to scare the horse. But the last of his harsh, reproving words
was still in his mouth when something occurred to justify, in a measure,
Crepe’s strange behavior, although it explained nothing.

A rose-and-orange flower bloomed suddenly in the blackness on his left.
A sharp _pow!_ as a gun spoke in the abrupt, staccato manner of guns
when they speak. Something whined, _wh-e-e-e!_ away off. For a second
Charlie hesitated, reins taut, wondering. A signal--somebody lost?
Or----

His perceptions were exceedingly rapid and logical. The sluggish-minded
did not usually function long in the range country. Nor was he a nervous
or timorous man. He did not jump to the conclusion that he had been shot
at, because he knew of no reason why any one should shoot at him. Nor
was he apt to be nervous under fire, having had that unpleasant
experience once or twice. At the same time he wanted to know just what
_was_ afoot. He felt reasonably safe in the shrouding cover of the dark,
if he were intruding on anything or any one.

So he lifted up his voice in a lusty bellow.

“Hey, there! What you shootin’ at?”

He got his answer at once. The gaudy flower of the Winchester gardens
bloomed its momentary brilliance in the night--once, twice, a third
time.

Charlie did not pause to investigate. He gave Crepe his head and
departed thence. Two more shots followed upon the hurried beat of the
hoofs. The whine of bullets overhead told Charlie that whoever fired
back, there in the darkness, was firing at him, sight unseen.

“Visitors ain’t popular here,” he muttered. “Far be it from me to
disturb anybody’s privacy. _I_ don’t need no second hint, you darned
fool. Save your powder.”

Half a mile at headlong gallop, and he pulled up to listen. No sound of
pursuit. No breath of air stirred. Nothing. He might have been a
solitary soul in a darkened void. That silence could be felt. He rode on
at the same jog trot.

“Now, what was all that about, back there, I wonder?” he said to
himself.

He was still wondering when he dropped down the north bank of the
Marias, forded a clear shallow river that sang a welcome song in a night
that held a touch of frost, and into which Crepe and the pack pony
dipped their muzzles thirstily. And this puzzled wonder still persisted
in Charlie’s mind half an hour later, when he snuggled down in his
unfolded bed beside the TL stable wall, inside which his horses
contentedly munched hay. His last conscious thought was of that strange,
whispering sound in the night, and the reason for those shots. And it
was the first thing in his mind when he opened his eyes to bright
sunshine pouring into the valley, and “Rock” Holloway inquiring jovially
why in blazes he didn’t use the bunk house instead of the open air for
sleeping purposes.

“I just got in during the night, myself,” Rock told him. “Been riding
with the Maltese Cross. Come on and have some breakfast.”

Nona Holloway smiled at Charlie. Neither she nor her husband asked
questions. Charlie Shaw had ridden for her long before Rock came into
the Marias country, when she was a slim, sad wisp of a girl, with a baby
sister and a bunch of cattle on her hands and a strange quality of
exciting the admiration and respect of every man she came in contact
with. Rock had fallen in love with her and married her, and the TL had
waxed prosperous under their joint control. And Charlie Shaw had drifted
out of their employment for reasons that he could never think about,
much less discuss. He didn’t know why he drifted in there now, except
that these two were his friends, and he knew he was welcome, and it was
on his way, because, when he parted with the Seventy-seven, he had
decided to head for Fort Benton in search of a job. He would not ask
Rock for a job. A foolish pride forbade, although he had never been able
to rid himself of a feeling that the TL was home.

So he ate breakfast and merely remarked that he was through with the
Seventy-seven and on his way. And after breakfast, as he and Rock stood
on the porch, Charlie looked out over the valley with a touch of regret.
Four years is a long time, and just that period had elapsed since Rock
Holloway came jogging across Lonesome Prairie, to look his first on the
silver band of the Marias, to find himself faced at this very ranch with
a tragic emergency. And now, Charlie reflected, Rock had a wife and a
son and three thousand cattle and a ranch that was a tiny kingdom in
itself. They had fought side by side against high-handed thieves.
Charlie had drifted, and Rock had taken root. Peace and prosperity and
happiness had come to him and the girl to whom Charlie had been a loyal
servant before Rock took a hand in the game. Charlie knew all about it.
He had watched the drama enacted. Some men were lucky, and some were
wise. He himself was neither, he supposed.

                   *       *       *       *       *

He looked out on irrigated meadows which gave their harvest into ranked
stacks of hay. The river bank was cluttered with painted buildings.
Lines of fence, inclosing choice pastures, spread up and down the valley
as far as he could see. He stole a look at Rock--a look that was wistful
and wholly without envy. And Charlie was not thinking so much of land
and cattle as the most desirable of Rock’s possessions. Consequently he
was surprised to keen attention by the words that presently Rock
uttered.

“I guess things have been coming too easy for us, too long,” Rock said.
“We had a wild time here once, Charlie, and it looked like a tough game.
Then we got organized, and it has been smooth as silk. I suppose there
is always somebody who hasn’t got anything, cooking up a scheme for
getting something for nothing.”

“What’s wrong?” Charlie asked him bluntly.

“We’re shy about a hundred head of beef this fall,” Rock told him.

Charlie didn’t need the significance of that explained to him. He was a
range rider, born to the business. He recalled those sun-dried hides in
the grass. The Seventy-seven was losing cattle--beef cattle, too.

“Gosh!” he murmured. “I wonder if we got another ‘Buck’ Walters among us
again.”

“I don’t know.” Rock frowned. “That is to be found out. I know we are
out that many because the bulk of the beef is shipped. There will be
only a few picked up on the outskirts of the range before the Maltese
Cross round-up quits for the season. I have been with them all fall, so
I know nothing was overlooked. That’s about forty-five hundred dollars
in cold cash, Charlie--more than a small outfit like us can afford to
lose.”

“Got any idea?” Charlie asked.

“None worth shouting,” Rock admitted. “It’s so long since we had
anything like this to deal with that it seems impossible such a thing
could happen. Yet these cattle are gone. I have no reason to suspect
anybody. But I am going to scout with my eyes and ears open, you can bet
your life on that.”

“There is always some feller ready to bust the Eighth Commandment wide
open if he sees a chance,” Charlie observed. “Has it struck you that all
this railroad-construction work offers a chance for somebody to butcher
beef on the range and sell it to them camps?”

“Sure,” Rock declared. “But nobody has showed signs of that, that I know
of.”

“I’m not so sure. The Seventy-seven has lost beef, too.”

He went on to tell Rock of finding those dried and wrinkled hides and
Elmer Duffy’s explosion, which had led to Charlie’s parting with the
outfit.

“I’m full-handed, or I’d put you to work,” Rock said. “You were a darned
fool to quit us, anyhow. I don’t like to fire a man to make room for
you, Charlie, but you stick around for a while, and I’ll see.”

“Oh, shucks, it’s easy enough to get a job,” Charlie replied, turning
Rock’s remark aside.

“And that hide thing is interesting,” Rock said thoughtfully. “Perhaps
those construction camps would bear watching.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Charlie didn’t tell him about that odd whispering sound in the night,
nor the shots that were fired at him. There was no apparent connection
between what he heard and cattle stealing--none that Charlie could see.
And it seemed an entirely incredible affair, anyway, viewed from the
sun-warmed porch of the ranch house. Nevertheless an idea as fantastic
as that experience in the black dark popped into Charlie Shaw’s head--an
idea that he felt powerfully urged to act upon. But he kept it to
himself. If it proved imaginary, he would not have made himself
ridiculous by talking. And Elmer Duffy’s scornful, angry epithets of
“bonehead” and et cetera, had got deeper under Charlie’s skin than he
cared to admit. He wanted to make Elmer swallow both his words and his
opinions. And Charlie Shaw hated a cow thief. He had reasons, both
personal and general. He carried scars on his body from the hands of
such gentry. So did Rock. They were a unit in that. And they were
equally close mouthed in important matters. They stood now silent,
looking out across the river.

“The Cross missed any stock?” Charlie asked at last.

“No; nor the Narrow Gauge nor the Circle,” Rock replied. “But the
trouble is they have so many cattle they would not miss any unless the
loss was heavy; whereas we know within a few head how many calves we
should brand and how many beef we should ship. We are shy almost one
fourth of our beef cattle, and that is too big a whack at us. I don’t
know what to think.”

“It’s aggravatin’, all right,” Charlie said. “By gosh, y’know, I think
it would be a good thing to make a round of them gradin’ camps on
Lonesome Prairie. Let’s do it, Rock, you an’ me.”

“I got to go to Helena,” Rock said. “Be gone a week. If you don’t get
restless and move on, we’ll go scouting when I come back.”

“I’m restless right now,” Charlie said. “If you’ll have your cook put up
about three days’ grub for me, I’m goin’ to turn back north on a
expedition of my own. Maybe I’ll know something when I get back, maybe
not. I’ll tell you, anyhow.”

“All right,” Rock said. He asked no questions. A man’s business, unless
he was on the pay roll of an outfit, was entirely his own. Rock knew
that Charlie didn’t turn in his tricks without a reason. But he knew
better than to inquire that reason if Shaw didn’t volunteer it. He
watched Charlie ride, leading his pack horse, up the north bank of the
Marias, some time later, with a certain amount of unsatisfied curiosity
and a feeling that he should perhaps be riding alongside that
fair-haired youth. And if Rock had known what worked in Charlie Shaw’s
mind, he would have mounted and followed him.

As it was, Charlie rode north alone. There had been a time when he never
left that ranch in the valley without a rifle under his stirrup leather.
When Buck Walters’ shadow lay like a menace across that range a man
needed to be armed. But for a long time the Winchester carbine had
reposed in Charlie’s bed, except when he occasionally hunted antelope or
wolves. Now it was in its worn scabbard beneath his leg. And Charlie
felt a little keyed up, a little expectant. If he were lucky he might
have the laugh on Elmer Duffy at last. For things had assumed a
different aspect since he learned that the TL was losing beef wholesale.
On that was based the idea that had popped suddenly into Charlie’s
mind--an idea too far-fetched to divulge to Rock Holloway. Some one had
begun to steal cattle again, where none had dared, after the private war
that wiped out Buck Walters and his crowd. Here and there in the range
country there was always some one who coveted his neighbor’s ox, just as
in more highly organized communities light-fingered folk always seek to
filch goods that other men have accumulated by legitimate enterprise and
honest industry.

If a man could not enjoy the fruits of his labor, he would know the
reason why. Charlie considered the situation. There had been no known
rustling on the Marias for four years, and perhaps it looked like good
picking. With that to spur him, Charlie was inordinately curious to know
who was so nervous as to smoke up an unseen solitary traveler crossing
Lonesome Prairie at night--and why? The way to read a book is to open it
and turn the pages. The way to learn what Charlie wanted to know was to
look over the ground. There was, besides, a farther field to explore in
the light of Rock’s lost cattle.

He had the wispy intermittent blue of smoke from the burning coal seam
to mark the place where those shots had been fired. By half past one he
drew up on the low rise above the swale in which he had heard that
peculiar sound.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Nothing in sight. Autumn-bleached grass, miles of it; cattle grazing
here and there. Distant saw-toothed mountain summits breaking the sky
line. Away off to the north, below the horizon, Charlie knew that gangs
of men with plows and scrapers and teams swarmed like an extended column
of warrior ants, constructing the grade of a transcontinental railway.
Charlie had in his own mind established a possible relation between the
vanished cattle and this activity. It had come to him, far-fetched but
possible, as he talked to Rock. But first, he wanted to look about here
for some sign which might confirm his suspicions.

A casual inspection of the spot revealed nothing. The earth was baked
hard. The short grass, dry and stiff, sprung back to erectness when
released from underfoot. He was, however, quite sure of his location,
having almost an uncanny sense about such things.

He swung in a circle. Dipping into the hollow at a slow walk, he pulled
up. In that swale strange marks showed. The grass was pressed flat in
swaths less than three feet wide, as if heavy objects had been dragged
or rolled across the surface. He got down, bent to examine these
peculiarities, and then walked on, leading his two horses, while he
conned the ground. So moving, he came to a patch of prickly pear.
Stooping, he examined the crushed spiny leaves. A squinting look brought
wrinkles between his eyes.

“Huh!” he grunted.

Then he mounted and followed the marks at a trot. As the crow flies, the
flattened swaths ran straight for the burning lignite, where the blue
vapors drifted, and it was no great distance to the place.

He halted a few yards short of a crevice with ragged edges. Twenty feet
on either side the grass had perished long ago. Charlie dismounted and
approached with caution. To have the ground break at the lip under his
feet meant that he would perish, like a fly cast in a camp fire. The
opening, narrow and fairly deep, gave off fumes and smoke, like the
breath of some uneasy subterranean monster. Now and then an upward whiff
of gas ignited and burned with a wavering flame. Anything dropped in
that crevice was utterly beyond rescue.

The marks that Charlie followed ran up to the brink, which proved solid
earth when he stamped cautiously. Hoofprints and boot marks appeared,
with disturbed places in the powder-dry soil. A few broken places showed
where comparatively weighty objects had been pushed over the edge. And
that was all he could see.

Charlie stood a few minutes staring thoughtfully. He frowned into the
pit. Few signs, but highly significant ones to him. Queer. Then he
mounted his horse and back-tracked. He partly guessed what had made that
whispering sound in the night. Now he desired to disprove or verify that
guess.

That was what he had in mind when he loped back to where he took up this
trail. By the bend of the grass blades he knew they had been dragged up
that swale. Where there was an end, there must be a beginning. Charlie
made a bet with himself that these marks would begin somewhere near the
spot from which those shots had been fired at him.

He won his bet. The narrow swaths lay along the draw. The depression
narrowed, then deepened. Charlie remembered then that a soak spring
seeped out of a bank down there, affording water to a hundred head or so
of stock. He recalled something else. Three years earlier a horse outfit
had located on that spring and built a small corral there, part sod,
part poles. Then they had abandoned the place for a better one, forty
miles east.

He came around a low shoulder of hill. The old corral still stood. It
was still in fair shape, and it had been in use. That was plain enough.
The marks he had followed began at the gate. The loose dust on the floor
was trampled. And from just outside the gate the tracks of a wagon led
away northward.

“Huh!” He grunted his favorite monosyllable.

He walked about the place, noted every mark in the dust, and poked with
his toe, here and there, at certain slightly discolored patches in the
corral.

“This,” he muttered to himself, “is a highly interestin’ state of
affairs, I wish to remark.”

He sat on his horse for a minute after he mounted again. He looked off
toward the Marias, in two minds at the moment. Then he reflected that
Rock Holloway was on his way to Helena. And for various reasons Charlie
concluded to play a lone hand. So he made a complete circle of the
place, carefully scanning the ground; when he came back to the wagon
track, he followed that, riding at a steady trot.

                   *       *       *       *       *

If he expected that to lead him to any new place, person or conclusion,
he was disappointed. In the few years since Charlie first crossed the
Marias River, with all the territory north of it an unpeopled waste, the
first waves of the ultimate flood of settlers had begun to seep into the
country. Up in the Sweet Grass, where he and Rock Holloway had fought a
battle with organized thieves, there were now many ranches, small and
large. A wagon trail ran between the Sweet Grass and Fort Benton--a
trail which crossed the Marias halfway between the TL and the
Seventy-seven. The single wagon track Charlie followed angled off until
it merged with the Sweet Grass Trail. It was lost in these twin ruts.
Wagons came and went daily on that road. One wheel track is as another.
For purposes of identification, the trail was lost.

But Charlie kept riding. Far off the construction camps began to
show--dim smudges on the horizon. As he drew nearer, he could see the
dark streak of the grade and the moving teams. And when the Sweet Grass
Trail crossed the right of way, Charlie turned aside and jogged toward a
cluster of buildings, like a small village sitting by a stream, where
the buffalo lodges of the Blackfeet had been pitched in years gone by.

Half a mile from this camp he came on a small herd of cattle grazing
under the eye of a solitary rider. Perhaps a hundred head of cows, aged,
scraggy, culls in fair flesh. He marked three or four different brands
from the Judith Basin.

“Camp beef?” he asked the herder.

“Yeah,” the fellow drawled. He was a pimply-faced youngster with a
visible swagger. “Beef for the bohunks.”

“Butchered as needed, I suppose?” Charlie commented.

“Sure. This is a headquarters commissary. Big layout. Feeding two or
three camps from here.”

Charlie passed on. On a bit of good grass along the creek bottom he
staked his horses and cooked his supper. Grading camps offered none of
the hospitality the range afforded. No casual wayfarer got anything
there unless he paid his way. They were there to build a grade for the
Great Northern, for the profit of the contractors, and it was a grubby,
driving business.

Charlie ate his supper by the fire, watched the men and teams string in
at six o’clock. It was a big camp. He estimated four hundred men. Four
hundred men ate a lot of beef. And two other camps drew supplies from
there. He looked at the camp and at the grazing herd, and then he did a
lot of thinking. He still lay thinking, looking up at the stars, long
after he turned in. With the tarpaulin drawn up to his chin, he stared
at the Big Dipper, the North Star, and at many a constellation
glittering in its appointed place. But his mind was not on the stars in
their courses--upon the cosmic wonder of an October night. No. More
practical matters engaged his busy brain. And not until the sharp nip of
the autumn frost made him draw his head under the canvas did he fall
asleep.

In the morning, with his own matutinal coffee bestowed where it would do
the most good, and the grading crews stringing out to work in a cold
dawn, Charlie walked into the camp and sought the head cook.

“Who does the beef buying for this outfit?” he asked.

The man pointed to a small tent-roofed wooden shack. “Chief’s office,”
he said and turned to his work.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Charlie rapped on the door. Some one said: “Come in!” Charlie entered. A
rotund man sat at a rudely constructed desk littered with account
sheets. He half turned on the box that served for a chair.

“What can I do for you?” he inquired briskly.

“Buy some beef off me,” Charlie answered. “Patronize home industry an’
help the country flourish.”

The man bit the end of a pencil reflectively.

“Well, I don’t know about that,” he said.

“I’m telling you so you will know,” Charlie returned impudently. “Beef
is my business, I raise it, buy it, and sell it, on the hoof or
dressed--any old way that seems profitable. You must need a heap to feed
this gang.”

“Sure. But I don’t buy beef as casual as you’d buy a pair of socks,” the
other declared. “I’ve got a considerable supply on hand and contracted
for.”

“I can deliver you prime dressed beef right here in your camp for four
cents a pound,” Charlie offered crisply.

“I can get it for less’n that.” The commissariat manager shook his head.
“Don’t use prime beef, nohow.”

“Still, if you could get first-class beef at third-class prices, you’d
make money by buying it,” Charlie pointed out. “It goes farther. How
about three and a half cents?”

“Don’t interest me much.”

“Say, now,” Charlie drawled, “I got quite a bunch of stuff I can turn
over at a pretty low figure. And I know where I can get more. Say three
cents a pound.”

“Well, that’s fair enough,” the chubby one admitted. “But I think maybe
I could do a mite better still, if I had to. And I’ve got some stock
ahead. No; I guess we can’t do business, stranger. Thanks, just the
same.”

“You’re the doctor,” Charlie said and stepped out.

As he walked back to his horses, he emitted sundry unbelieving grunts.
Three cents a pound was ridiculous; and yet the fat one thought he could
get it for still less. There was a screw loose somewhere. Three-year-old
beef steers were netting forty dollars in Chicago; cows about thirty. A
fair three-year-old would dress six or seven hundred pounds; a cow four
or five hundred. At three cents they would bring about eighteen and
fifteen dollars respectively. Charlie had named those prices to the
contractor as a bait, and if he hadn’t caught a fish, he had at least
got a nibble that quickened his pulse. No rancher would sell beef for
half what it would bring in the open market. If that railroad camp got
beef at anywhere near that price, it was stolen beef. And any man buying
supplies on a large scale would be familiar enough with current prices
to know that it was stolen. Still, a suspicion was not convicting
evidence.

On his way in and out of that camp, Charlie had used a pair of naturally
keen eyes. He marked the meat house by its screened windows. He would
have liked a look inside, but that was hardly feasible. He considered,
however, how he might get such a look and decided upon the only method
open to him. There was a risk, to be sure. But a period of uneventful
placidity had not wholly atrophied in Charlie Shaw a capacity for
discounting risks. There had been plenty during his first years in
Montana. He decided to take a chance.

He saddled, packed, mounted and ambled slowly south again. The camp beef
herd grazed abroad. Again Charlie met the pimply-faced youth resplendent
in Angora-faced chaps, with a long-barreled six-shooter dangling at his
hip. He sat sidewise in his saddle, as proud as if he had been riding
point on a trail herd from the Panhandle.

“With all that crew to feed,” Charlie remarked over a cigarette, “the
butcher gang ought to cut your herd down pretty fast.”

“Oh, so-so,” the herder said. “About a couple a day.”

Charlie jogged on. A couple a day. If that camp didn’t consume at least
fifteen hundred pounds of beef per diem, he was a poor judge of
appetites. Beef was the cheapest food in the country. Men who worked ten
hours a day behind plow and scraper could eat like the vikings of old.
Two scraggy cows a day? Hardly.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Two miles south in a convenient hollow he picketed his horses. The rest
of that day he lay low, keeping a more or less casual watch from a
grassy rise. Nothing like a wagon arrived or departed. When dusk fell
again, he packed his outfit and rode back to the construction camp.

He didn’t wait until everybody went to bed. He desired a little private
inspection. His chance of going unmolested was better while men still
moved about the camp. If he were challenged, he would act as judgment
dictated.

He gained a corner of the cook house unseen. From there it was only a
step or two to the meat house. Chance favored him. A light burned in the
place. Charlie stole up and peered through a screened window. The same
brusque cook he had spoken to that morning was slicing steak on a block.
Back of him, in rows, hung quarters of beef. At least six head of
dressed beef hung from the pointed hooks in the beams above. Charlie
knew beef on the hoof, in the round, in the pen. They were prime steer
quarters, as good beef as ever went into Chicago. Nothing in that meat
house had come out of that herd of scraggy cows. That was certain.

He stole back to his horses. Clear of the camp, he paused to look back,
frowning at the scores of lights--yellow dots against the darkened
plain.

If he had read the sign right, first at the burning coal seam and now
here, some enterprising persons were collecting a lot of easy money.
Charlie knew how Rock Holloway felt about such things. No man likes to
have his pocket picked. It is poor satisfaction merely to know how the
picking is done. Charlie suspected that Rock felt very much as old Elmer
Duffy had felt when he blew up over the hides in the grass, only he
sympathized with Rock, and he still held that old Elmer had no business
to insult him. Yes, Rock would feel like the Saturday shopper whose
purse has been snatched--he would be furiously eager to get his hands on
the snatcher. And the burden of Charlie’s thought was how this could be
done.

Lightning seldom strikes twice in the same place, but thieves frequently
do, especially range thieves. It was this conviction that sent Charlie
loping away southward in the dark.

Twenty-five miles is no great matter to fresh horses. Charlie swung in
on the Benton-Sweet Grass Trail, held it till he was abreast of the
burning coal seam, then turned straight east. By midnight the ghostly
flicker wavering above that incandescent crevice was a beacon before
him.

He skirted it, moving slowly, with a watchful eye, and dropped into the
draw. When he judged that he was within a few hundred yards of the old
corral, he dismounted, hobbled both horses, and left them. They wouldn’t
stir after that ride. He could easily find them again. Then he took his
carbine in hand and stole toward his destination, as cautiously as if he
were stalking a wolf. He had, indeed, the certainty that he stalked not
a lone wolf but a pack, and he was well aware that wolves have teeth.
The wolves he sought might be hunting, and they might not.

The old corral loomed before him. Keeping close under the southern bank,
he was one with the night. A shadow lay where he moved. One stealthy
step at a time. He reflected that a hunch is a strange thing. When it
worked properly it gave curious results.

A lantern glowed dimly on the floor of the corral. Within the radius of
its gleam two men were skinning the carcass of a dead beast. Other bulky
carcasses lay in the dust; some were reddish white, where the hide had
been flenched out on either side; some were still waiting the knife,
where the ax or other killing instrument had felled them, not long
before.

Charlie stole nearer, one thumb hooked over the hammer of his carbine.
He could see the dim outline of a wagon backed up by the gate and the
faint forms of saddled horses. There should be more than two men. Yet
the fewer sharing in that nefarious business, the greater the profit.
Too many cooks usually spoiled that kind of broth.

In two more steps he could thrust his carbine through the pole and cover
them. With their hands in the air, the rest was simple. A really
exultant thrill stirred Charlie Shaw. He remembered Elmer Duffy’s angry
epithets. To-morrow he would make Elmer sing a different tune.

And the next moment he was borne to earth. A sharp rap on the head put a
full stop to his pleasant anticipations.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Charlie revived to consciousness he found himself in a situation
unique and dangerous. He lay flat on his back. His head was free. He
could twist it about. The pole height of the corral towered over him.
Within the inclosure, not two men, but three slashed hurriedly with
skinning knives, and they were working at the last carcass.

But, apart from looking on, he was quite helpless. His arms were
straight down by his sides. His legs were straight. He was not tied,
being more effectually trussed than with a rope. He was wrapped tight in
an excellent substitute for a strait-jacket, inasmuch as they had folded
him in a raw beef hide, wet and strong with animal smell, and they had
laced it tight, from his ankles to his neck, with thongs of the same
material. A mummy swathed in its ancient bandages was no more thoroughly
bound than he.

Charlie watched them deftly quarter the carcasses. The head, feet and
offul of each steer were piled in the middle of the hide, and the edges
drawn together. Once one man looked through the pole fence at him and
grinned. He couldn’t make out their faces in that dim light, but he
could see what they did. The quarters of beef were stacked in the deep
wagon box. One mounted his horse and dragged the bundles of hide
outside. They scratched the dust of the corral back and forth to
obliterate bloodstains and telltale signs. Eventually he could hear the
jingling of harness, and a four-horse team was hitched to the wagon.

Charlie regretted a little that he had been so sanguine; still---- His
eyes marked every move. One man mounted the high seat. The wheels rolled
away in the dark.

And when the cluck and clack grew fainter, the other two led saddle
horses out of the gloom.

“Take him first trip?” one said.

“Better,” the other replied. “I’ll snake him. You bring one of the
hides. We’ll have to get a wiggle on, too, or it’ll be daylight.”

The noose of a rope was slipped over Charlie’s feet. He was yanked along
over the grass. Once a clump of prickly pear raked his cheek. Otherwise
he suffered no bruise. The ground was smooth. The thick hide protected
his body. Behind him the second horse plodded, dragging his burden by
the saddle horn. Again Charlie heard that mysterious, slithering,
whispering sound, like a huge snake scraping over dry grass. Only, now,
he himself was helping to make this noise in the night.

His two horses loomed in the draw. The cavalcade stopped.

“Here’s his outfit,” said one. “What’ll we do with ’em?”

“Turn ’em loose when we’re through,” the other replied. “They’ll amble
off to their own range, an’ whoever finds ’em will have to guess.
Simplest.”

They moved on. The draw flattened out to the level of the plains, and
the flicker of the burning lignite showed ahead. They drew up twenty
yards back from the crevice.

A wind blew faintly out of the west. Charlie could smell the gas wafted
from that underground furnace. A very neat incinerator. It would not be
the first time that thieves, surprised red-handed, had acted on the
principle that dead men tell no tales.

Yet in his shroud of green rawhide, Charlie made no protest and lifted
no plea for mercy when the riders dismounted and stood over him. A
wavering tongue of fire lifted above the crevice, casting a fitful glow
on horses and men. They dragged the bundle of hide and offal to the rim
and dumped it in. A strong odor of scorching hair and hide wafted up.
They came back to Charlie.

“Take his head,” one muttered. “I’ll get him by the feet.”

They stooped.

When the head of one bent over, and his fingers touched the hide,
something went _pow!_ in his face. He fell backward, as if clouted with
a hammer. Simultaneously Charlie’s arm thrust straight at the man
reaching for his feet, and that outstretched hand held a six-shooter.

“Hands up!” he commanded, and the man obeyed.

Charlie sat up. The rawhide fell away from him, parted at the lacings.
He wiggled his legs out of the narrow pocket.

“Keep ’em up, too,” he said cheerfully, “unless you’d rather join your
partner.”

Charlie stretched his legs casually. He glanced at the body behind him.
Not much need to look. The muzzle of the gun had been fairly in the
man’s face when he fired. He stepped behind the other man, disarmed him,
and then ordered him to walk over beside his horse and mount. With the
fellow’s own reata he tied both wrists securely behind his back.

“Next time you sew a man in a cowhide and figure to dump him in a
burning coal seam to roast alive,” Charlie said, “you’d better search
him to make sure he hasn’t got a gun in a Texas holster under his
armpit. And try to remember that green hide stretches quite a lot if a
man has any strength in his arms, and he has an hour or so to work it
loose.”

He mounted the other horse and hazed his prisoner down the draw until he
picked up his own outfit. Then he headed straight for the Marias, riding
fast. Riders on fresh horses could beat that wagonload of stolen beef to
the railroad camp. The Seventy-seven round-up would just about be camped
at the ranch. It was a little closer to the Seventy-seven than to Rock
Holloway’s, and Charlie felt that it would really be a lot of
responsibility off his shoulders if he delivered his prisoner and his
information straight to the hands of Elmer Duffy.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Charlie lifted his head from a bunk in one corner of the Seventy-seven
ranch house. A wagon was clattering into the yard. Elmer Duffy and half
a dozen riders flanked it like a bodyguard.

The box was piled high with beef. A tarpaulin was stretched over the
quarters. On top of the tarp lay several fresh hides. Beside the man
driving the wagon sat a sullen-looking captive.

Charlie went out to meet them without undue haste. He looked the layout
over from the porch and stooped to buckle on his spurs. Elmer Duffy
swung down from his sweaty horse.

“Well, kid,” he said genially, “we got ’em with the goods. That
contractor slid out, but the stock inspectors are after him. Come back
by the furnace an’ the old corral an’ pick up the hides an’ the feller
you bumped off. Some of them cattle was Seventy-sevens, but mostly TL
stuff. These fellers had a lot of the money on ’em they got for this
beef. You sure done a nice stroke of business last night.”

“Yeah,” Charlie agreed, “for a bonehead josher--yes.”

He walked on to the stable. His two horses stood in stalls. He had them
out, saddled, and his pack part hitched, when Elmer Duffy came striding
from the house. He had a green slip in his hand which he held out to
Charlie. It was a check for five hundred dollars.

“Say, you ain’t pullin’ your freight, are you, Charlie?” Elmer inquired.

“Oh, no,” Charlie replied ironically, his eyes on the check. “I’m fixin’
to make myself at home with the Seventy-seven for all time, naturally.
What’s this?”

“I made a crack before the whole outfit, didn’t I,” Elmer stated, “that
I’d give five hundred dollars to lay my hands on whoever was killin’
beef? Well, I’m makin’ good on it. You got it comin’.”

Charlie stared at him and the check, but he said nothing.

“Look here,” Elmer said hurriedly. “You got a steady job with the
Seventy-seven as long as you want. You’ll have to be on hand to give
your evidence, anyhow, at the trial. An’ I guess maybe you’re a smarter
kid than I reckoned. Maybe I was kinda hasty the other day. I can use
fellers like you in this outfit.”

“I don’t want neither your money nor your job nor your gratitude,
Elmer,” Charlie said politely.

“You better think that over, Charlie,” Elmer said, not quite so
politely. “There’s a long, hard winter comin’, remember.”

Charlie tucked in the last hitch on the pack, stuck his foot in the
stirrup, and swung up to his saddle on Crepe. The black horse shook his
head, jingling the bit, and pawed the hard earth impatiently. Charlie
looked down with an expansive grin.

“Listen, Elmer,” said he. “I wouldn’t work for you ever again, nohow. I
told you, when you were fonchin’ around the other mornin’, that I’d show
you. I’ve done it. I rounded up your thieves, while you were runnin’
around in circles, cussin’ the luck. If you feel that you’re under any
obligation to me, forget it. I did that little job for nothin’, just to
show you I could.

“And,” he concluded, “as far as that hard winter thing is concerned, I
was born in El Paso. I come up the trail when it was a tough
proposition. I’m twenty-six years old, an’, by Judas priest, I ain’t
never died a winter yet!”

[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the June 20, 1927 issue
of The Popular Magazine.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EASY MONEY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


