The Project Gutenberg eBook of The modern writer
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The modern writer

Author: Sherwood Anderson

Release date: September 20, 2023 [eBook #71691]

Language: English

Original publication: San Francisco: The Lantern Press

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MODERN WRITER ***





                              THE MODERN
                                WRITER

                         BY SHERWOOD ANDERSON

                            [Illustration]

                        SAN FRANCISCO + MCMXXV
                           THE LANTERN PRESS
                       GELBER, LILIENTHAL, INC.




                           COPYRIGHT MCMXXV




                           THE MODERN WRITER

                         BY SHERWOOD ANDERSON


After all it is not very strange that we in America have been a long
time coming to the beginning of something like a national literature.
Nations are not made in a short time and we Americans have been trying
to make rather a large nation. In a compact small country in which for
hundreds of years the same people have lived, slowly building up
traditions, telling old tales, singing old songs, the story teller or
the poet has something in which he can rest. People grown old, as a
people, on the same land, through which old rivers flow, looking out for
generations upon the same great plains and up into the same mountains,
come to know each other in an intimate way unknown to us here. The son
following in the footsteps of a father dreams old dreams. The land
itself whispers to him. Stories are in the very air about the writer.
They spring up out of the soil on which for many hundreds of years
people of one blood have been born, have lived, suffered, had moments of
happiness and have died.

In America the writer is faced with a situation that is unique. Our
country is vast. In it are to be found so many different conditions of
life, so many different social traditions that the writer who attempts
to express in his work something national is in an almost impossible
position. At best, as yet, he can only snatch at fragments. California
is not Maine. North Dakota is not Louisiana. Ohio is not North Carolina.
We are as yet strangers to each other. We are all of us just a little
afraid of each other. Time only can weld us together, make us one
people, make us understand each other. And in understanding alone is the
real love of comrades, that is the beginning of a real love of our
country.

Now I am an American writer and I have been by critics in general
classed among that rather vague group known as the Moderns. I have set
myself here to speak to you on the subject of modern American writing.
The whole business of expressing definite opinions is new to me. I am in
my nature a teller of tales, not a preacher, and I have been told that
in trying to address any considerable number of people on a large
subject it is a mistake to try to cover too much ground, that the writer
should confine himself to the making of a few points, but how I am to
do that on such a subject as Modernism I do not know. As a matter of
fact I have, within the last year, written a book on the subject, a book
called _A Story Teller’s Story_ and in it there are I believe something
like a hundred and thirty thousand words. Now that the book, half a
tale, half an attempt to put down certain notions of my own, is written,
I look forward eagerly to the getting of my hands on the proofs. There
are so many things I shall not succeed in getting said, even in a large
book.

As everyone knows, there is in the world at this time what is broadly
termed a Modern movement. It has expressed itself in a great many ways.
In a short time within the last fifteen or twenty years, it has
practically revolutionized painting all over the world. It has crept
into the writing of prose, into the making of song, into sculpture,
into architecture. Although you may not realize it the fact is that the
neckties worn by many men in our city streets and the dresses worn by
the women have been influenced by the movement. The street scene of the
American city is becoming more colorful, designs are bolder. The modern
movement is beginning to express itself in buildings. In our residences
we are less inclined to copy the impulses of old lands. Architecture,
long one of the most dead and dreary of the arts as practiced in
America, is becoming alive. It will become every year, I believe, more
alive.

But it would be impossible for me, in a short article to speak in any
general way on so broad a subject. It will be enough if I can give you
some notions of what the present day American writer is faced with, what
conditions he has to meet, what difficulties are to be overcome, what
in my opinion is making American writing so bad and what in present day
conditions tends to make it better.

As no man can speak of the writing of a country without saying something
of the history of the intellectual life of the country, I shall have to
begin by speaking of that.

It is, I think, pretty well understood among us that the intellectual
life of America had its home nest in New England. Our culture is as yet
a puritanical New England culture. The New England states, all cold,
hard and stony, produced a rather cold and stony culture, but the New
Englander, like so many repressed and defeated peoples, was
intellectually energetic. He spread his notion of life out over the
country. Living as he did in a land where the ground was cold and
comparatively unproductive underfoot and the skies cold and forbidding
overhead, he spent a great deal of his time cultivating God. His art
impulse was non-sensual, intellectual. Life to the New Englander was not
to be lived here and now. Life was to be spent in preparation for a life
after death. Love of his fellow man did not enter into the New
Englander’s scheme, and the arts were made the servants of morality.
There was so much of life of which the New Englander was forbidden to
speak, toward which he did not dare be too sympathetic that as a result
and while New England ruled, gentility and respectability became the
passion of our writers. In literature sins might be committed in France
or in some vague place far away like the South Seas, but among the
heroes and heroines of the writer’s fancy there must be no sin. As that
was a quite impossible supposition, in as much as the writer must after
all deal with human beings, the writers found a way out. The “good” and
the “bad” man notion was played up to the limit. Women in books became
all virgins or adventuresses. The good man had a hard struggle before
him but he always ended by getting rich and marrying the virgin, after
almost falling into the clutches of the adventuress. The puritanic mind
was satisfied. It was made happy. The man reader of the books could
always in the end follow with satisfaction the fancy of the writer and
end by becoming a millionaire and the woman reader could in fancy get
married, not as so often happens in real life by using methods that
would shock the puritan beyond recovery, but simply by virtue of
inherent goodness and virginity. It was a kind of patent formula that
always worked in books. And in books and in the “movies” it still works
pretty well. If any of you want to become writers and want to succeed it
is still the best of all formulas to follow.

It all fitted in so neatly, you see.

For while in our schools and colleges and in our literature the puritan,
the New Englander ruled, people were pouring into America from all over
western Europe. The cold blood of the men of the North was being mixed
constantly with the warmer blood of the South. Italians came. The Greeks
and the southern Slavs came in hundreds of thousands. The eager highly
temperamental Jews and the imaginative Celts poured in. On the West
coast they got the Spaniard and the Mexican, and no man ever, I believe,
accused the Spaniard or the Mexican of being puritanic.

The intellectual life of the country was being formed and controlled by
English Protestants while the physical American was being built up of a
mixture of all of the bloods of the western world and the process is
still, I believe, going on. In our political thought the Adamses of New
England, with their desire to establish an intellectual aristocracy,
are still, I believe, more powerful than Lincoln the artist democrat,
and, although by the world in general Whitman is recognized as our one
great American poet, I have heard of no general movement to introduce
him into our public schools to take the place of the decidedly second
rate and imitative New Englander, Longfellow.

I am sure that almost everyone nowadays knows that there is at this
moment something happening in the spiritual life of the American people.
In the first place, there has been for a long time now, and particularly
among our younger men and women, a rather intense boredom with the more
obvious impulses of our American life. There is a new restlessness that
is more and more expressing itself in individual revolution against the
social laws and customs of another age. Old gods are dead and we have
all gone hunting new gods. Men and women are seeking expression for
their lives in new and bolder ways and everywhere among writers the
Modern is but the man who is trying to give expression to the newer
impulses of our lives in books, in song, in painting and in all the
others of the seven arts.

You must understand of course that as a nation we have put something
across. Coming to America as we did, in reality scattered herds of
peoples from dozens of European countries, often not speaking the same
language, not having back of us the same traditions, spreading ourselves
out rapidly over a vast country, cutting down forests, building
railroads and bridges over rivers, mountains and deserts, learning to
know each other a little in the process, building cities and towns,
making the mines produce, making the land produce, we had for a long
time need of all our energies for purely physical purposes. A poet or a
painter in California in ’49 or in the middle west in Abraham Lincoln’s
day would have been a nuisance and a pest.

A man I know was during the war arrested and sent to jail for being
opposed to war, and I was discussing his fate with a friend.

“He ought to be sent to jail,” said my friend. “He ought to be hung. Any
man ought to be hung who doesn’t know any better than to be right when
all other decent healthy people in the world are wrong.”

However, let me return to my theme. I am trying to sketch briefly some
of the conditions that are at the bottom of what I conceive to be going
on nowadays in American writing. When we Americans had got our country
pretty well settled and had fought and won our Civil War, something else
happened. There came a revolution more widespread and deep in its
meaning than any other revolution that has ever happened in the western
world. Starting out as we did as an agricultural people we Americans
found ourselves suddenly landed in the very midst of the industrial age.
From being a nation of farmers, craftsmen and merchants we became,
almost within a generation, the leading industrial nation of the world.
We became factory hands rather than craftsmen, owners of factories
rather than land owners.

We had got into a new age almost over night. What had happened to us?

Standardization, for one thing.

Let me explain. As a natural result of industrial growth came
standardization. As anyone will understand, the man who owns a factory
for the making of women’s dresses, chewing gum, cigars, automobiles,
men’s hats, must, if his factory is to grow to the huge output he
desires, create in the public mind a widespread demand for one kind of
cigar, one kind of hat, one style of dress, one make of automobile.

Advertising as a force in our American life began to grow and here it is
that the present day American writer came into flower.

As a natural result of the demand for standardization of taste and
material desires came the modern magazine. The magazine with a
circulation of a million or two million became not unusual. The real
purpose, as everyone understands, was to create through advertising, a
nation-wide demand for certain commodities. The magazines were business
institutions run by business men with business ends in view. They have
served the purpose for which they were created admirably and taken for
what they are, that is to say at bottom merely as propaganda instruments
for business expansion, no man can quarrel with them.

However, it happens you see that the advertising medium, put out frankly
as an advertising medium, cannot exist. Although the modern man and
woman of the streets has been pretty effectually standardized as regards
his hat, the cigarette he smokes, the automobile he drives, he cannot in
reality be standardized. Few of us will as yet order our wives from a
mail order house. Although in America and during the long period during
which we have all been so busy conquering the mechanical world we have
in general looked upon the poet or the artist as rather a sissy, a nut,
a man who had better be brushed aside, we all have something of the poet
and lover in us. We cannot, at least not as yet, spend our hours of
leisure outside factory and office hours just looking at advertisements
of factory products and becoming excited because some man has performed
the heroic feat of going from the city of New York to San Francisco,
getting there in twenty-four hours in an aeroplane--instead of taking
four or five days on a train, has found a machine that will get him
there. We are really interested in the man in the machine--not in the
machine itself.

Little thoughts leak in. We wonder why the man wanted to go to San
Francisco in such a hurry--what he thought and felt as he rushed
along--what he was up to. There are all kinds of disturbing little
fancies. Our minds will not become standardized. They fly away from the
machine to the man. There remains a curious interest in one another.
Young men take girls on their arms and wander out at night into the
darkness. Young men become friends and spend nights walking and talking
together. Nothing that gets settled remains quite settled. When some of
us become too old or tired to try any more to think or feel there is
always youth coming on. Even marriage doesn’t settle things for us
although for a long time our novelists went on the assumption that it
did.

We find ourselves having to be intrigued into the pages of the
magazines--and if the magazines are to retain the large circulation they
require to do their work of standardization writers must be made to
serve their purpose.

The commercialization of the art follows as a perfectly natural result.

The popular writer is then just the man of talent who is willing to sell
his talent to the business man who publishes the magazine or to the book
publisher after large sales and the more talented he is the better he
gets paid. There is a job to be done and he does it, keeping his eye
always on the main chance, that is to say on the great unthinking buying
public. His position is pretty secure. In America we are in the habit of
thinking of the thing that succeeds as good, and therefore the man
whose books sell by the hundreds of thousands is looked up to with
respect. If success is the standard of measurement how can we do
anything else?

It happens, however, that the arts are not democratic, never have been,
and probably never will be. There is a nigger in the woodpile. The
ordinary standards of measurement do not quite work. We all have a vague
feeling there is something very much wrong. There is.

Let us look at the situation a moment. If you are a man conducting a
magazine that has a circulation of hundreds of thousands, or if you are
a movie magnate owning a business in which there is a huge initial
investment, you have to be pretty careful about treading on toes, do you
not? Your readers or patrons must not be offended or driven away. You
are appealing, must of necessity appeal, to a large number of people,
and among any large number of people there will be Catholics,
Protestants, Christian Scientists, believers in the Garden of Eden,
Darwinians, suburban housewives in large numbers, puritans, moralists,
all kinds of people with all kinds of notions of the good and bad.

Very well then--if you are a writer intent on catching and holding the
fancy of the crowd you have got to have a technique. You have got to
become the artful dodger, have got to invent or learn the trick of
creating in the mind of your audience the sensations of terror, delight,
amusement, suspense, without in any way actually touching the reality of
lives.

At the county fairs back in Ohio when I was a boy there used to be a
kind of faker who went about with a machine. Into this machine he put a
pound of sugar and started it going. It whirled about with great
rapidity and produced a kind of cloud-like candy concoction that looked
tremendously inviting. A pound of sugar would make a bushel of the
stuff, but when you had bought a bag of it and put a whole handful into
your mouth it melted away to nothing.

That is in reality the effect desired in the manufacture of any popular
art. It is the effect produced in reality by all the successful men, by
the realists who pretend to give you photographic reproductions of life
itself, by the respectable fine writers of the more conservative
magazines and publishing houses, as well as the men who fill the pages
of the cheap adventure magazines, the men called by the newspaper
fraternity “the bunk shooters.” You must seem to give a lot while really
giving nothing. No one must be hurt. No one must be offended. No one
must be made to think or feel. Keep it up and you will get rich.

To actually touch people’s lives is the unforgivable sin. Both thinking
and feeling are dangerous exercises, and besides people do not like
them.

You have got to get a special technique but if you are a writer and can
do it successfully you will be mighty well paid. Why, there are any
number of writers in America who receive from two to three or even five
thousand dollars for single short stories and if they are lucky and also
sell movie rights they often get two or three times that much. Writers
of the popular sort often make incomes of bankers or brokers, live
during the summer in villas in Maine or in the California Carmel
Highlands, drive expensive motor cars, own yachts and have a simply
splendid time apparently and never during a long lifetime make a single
contribution to the art of writing or write anything that a living soul
would ever think of reading after the writer has died or his temporary
vogue has passed.

I hope you understand, however, that all this has nothing at all to do
with the art of writing, that is to say in any sense in which real
writers of the world, men who have cared something about their craft
have always thought of it. These men have no more to do with the art of
writing than the average American movie star has to do with the art of
acting or the men who make the girls’ heads you see on the covers of our
American magazines have to do with the art of painting. It is all a kind
of special thing. You live in San Francisco and write dialect stories
concerning an imaginary kind of people who live in a Dutch settlement in
the Pennsylvania hills, or you live in a New York hotel and write
stories about cowboys or heroic lumberjacks. It is totally unnecessary
to know life, and in fact it will be better for you to let life alone.
Life, you see, is a complex delicate thing. Anything may happen in
life. We all know that. People hardly ever do as we think they should.
There are no plot short stories in life. All the clever tricks by which
effects are to be got on the printed page are in reality a selling out
of ourselves. If it is your purpose to live in a pasteboard world you
have got to avoid storms. There is always that huge, comfortable,
self-satisfied American audience made up of all kinds of people with
little prejudices, hates and fears that must not be offended. To know
men and women, to be in the least sympathetic with them in their actual
trials and struggles is a handicap. If it is your desire to be that kind
of a writer, to grow rich and be successful by writing and if you have a
natural talent that can be made to serve your purpose, stay just as far
away as possible from any real thinking or feeling about actual men and
women. Stay in the pasteboard world. Believe in your heroic cowboys and
lumberjacks. Go to the movies all you can. Read the magazines. Go to the
short story schools and learn the bag of tricks. Spend your time
thinking up plots for stories and never by any chance let the plots grow
naturally out of the lives and the hopes, joys and the sufferings of the
people you are writing about. That is the road to success.

And now, men and women, I am afraid you will think me an ill-natured
fellow. I have spent so large a part of my allotted time here in
speaking of what in my opinion is tending to make writing in America so
bad. It doesn’t seem right. I must remember that I am from Chicago--a
highly cultured center, surely--and that in Chicago we have a motto. Our
city mayor got it up several years ago, and for a year or two it was
plastered about everywhere on the walls and billboards of the city. “Put
away your hammer and get out your horn,” it said.

Now I shall try to do that.

There is, you see, a modern movement in America. We are not so
self-satisfied as we must often seem to strangers, to men from foreign
parts. We still walk about and talk things over among ourselves. There
is, if you are sensitive enough to feel it, a wistful something in the
air here. You will feel it in any large crowd. At present the Modern
Movement is perhaps a groping ill-defined movement but it exists. In
painting there are a number of men who have stopped making pleasant
enough drawings of the old swimming hole and the magazine cover lady,
who have thrown overboard the tricks of realism and representation and
the absorption in surface technique and who are trying to bring feeling
and form back into painting. The same thing is going on in the writing
of poetry. Architecture is freeing itself from imitation of dead
impulses and is taking new life.

In prose the movement is expressing itself in a growing number of men
who are really trying to be honest to the materials in which they work.

Let me explain what I mean by that, if I can.

I think you will all agree with me that in an older day in America, when
a great majority of the men who worked in the crafts, the blacksmiths,
silversmiths, shoemakers, harness makers, saddle makers, builders of
vehicles, furniture, etc., worked in small shops, with a few apprentices
to help, there was a feeling in the workman that later was pretty much
destroyed.

The factory came and swept the individual workman aside and with him
went much of the old workman’s feeling toward tools and materials.

The workman in the Ford factory, for example, has nothing at all to do
with his tools or the materials in which he works. His own individual
feeling toward tools and materials is ruthlessly suppressed. Individual
reaction to tools and materials is simply not wanted. What is wanted is
a highly standardized product turned out at a low manufacturing cost.

The hand of standardization is laid upon the workman in the factories as
I have tried to show you how it is being laid upon the workman in prose
who wants also to live on the expensive scale of the banker or the
broker.

I have tried to show you here that the popular magazines are but
factories for efficient standardization of the minds of people for the
purpose of serving the factories. I think they do not really pretend to
be anything else.

I am bringing no personal accusation against the factory owner or the
publishers of factory-made literature. They are business men and if I
were a business man I would try to be a good one. I would try to make
money. And anyway the individual factory owner or the individual owner
or owners of a magazine with a circulation of hundreds of thousands has
no more to do with the matter than have you and I. They also are caught
in a trap. Present day conditions are but the natural result of our
living in an industrial age. Until the impulse for vast production of
second-rate goods and the tendency to be satisfied with second-rate art
wears itself out or people grow tired of it things will go on just as
they are.

Back of it all, of course, lies the silly notion that people can get
happiness out of success, out of making money, the silly notion that any
man can be happy doing poor or sloppy work no matter how much temporary
success or praise he may win.

You must bear in mind that the mass of people here in America are
pretty much what the mass of people have always been in every other
country in every age, that is to say, rather lazy-minded, pretty
immature. We are given to childish pretense, to pretending to be the
thing we secretly admire rather than to go to all the trouble of being
it. We accept what is given us. For most of us, I suspect, bad hurried
cheap work doesn’t matter too much. It is the craftsman really who
suffers.

Now if you will consider with me what I have just said and will bear in
mind that the manufacturer of stories for popular magazines has nothing
at all to do with writing, and if you will also bear in mind that the
writer is but the workman whose materials are human lives you will get
at what I am trying to say and will understand the attitude toward his
work that the so-called Modern is trying to take.

The individual impulse in men to do good work goes on. Men are arising
everywhere who are trying to be true to the very complex materials they
have to try to handle. In spite of standardization the individual
impulses of men as workmen cannot quite be put down.

As I have gone about in the streets of American towns and cities I have
noticed that even the Ford cannot escape the workman impulse. Boys buy
second hand Fords and rebuild them into ‘Bugs’ and these ‘Bugs’ are
often enough light, graceful and fine. Ugly lines have been cut away.
Something altogether lacking in grace has been made graceful and it
would be worth while if people could come to understand that the boy who
does that is a craftsman following a craftsman’s impulse and is more
important to the community than a dozen manufacturers of cheap novels,
little tame verses or cheap magazine stories. He is meeting the
aesthetic needs of his nature with the materials at hand, and a Cezanne,
a Matisse, a Turgenieff or a Shakespeare could do no more than that. The
artist is after all but the craftsman working more intensively in more
complex and delicate materials.

The artist who works in stone, in color, sounds, words, building
materials, and often in steel, as in the designing of bodies for some of
the finer automobiles, is but the craftsman working in materials that
are often elusive and difficult to handle and bringing into his work not
only the skill of the craftsman but also the attempt at an expression of
some need of his own inner being. That is the whole story.

The Modern Movement, then, seen from this point of view, is in reality
an attempt on the part of the workman to get back into his own hands
some control over the tools and materials of his craft. In certain
fields it is very difficult. In the theatre, for example, the artist, to
work at all, has to have an expensive equipment. There is needed a large
investment and money doesn’t like to take chances. It is much safer when
the theater wants to be artistic to run into Belasco realism, bring a
Child’s restaurant onto the stage or have a real automobile cross the
stage at thirty miles an hour--something of that sort, some stunt, is
safer when large sums of money have to be spent.

However, the workman in words or in color has a better chance. If, for
example, I can make my living by going somewhere and delivering a dull
sermon, something like this, to a lot of good-natured patient people, or
by working six months of the year in an advertising agency writing soap
advertisements, I can perhaps save enough money to write disregarding
the magazines for another six months. I know one very good modern
painter who becomes a house painter when he is broke, and one of
America’s finest poets works as a reporter on a newspaper. In America,
just now, it is not too hard for a man to make a living, particularly if
he is discreet enough not to have children.

And then things are slowly getting better. In his “_Life on the
Mississippi_” Mark Twain said something to the effect that the writer in
the end always wrote what the public and the editors wanted. “We often
write what we think and feel but in the end we scratch all out and give
them what they want,” he said. I am not quoting exactly. You will find
it in the book. The fact is that it was pretty much true in Twain’s day
and isn’t quite so true now.

That the workman is a better and truer man when he is given control of
the tools and materials of his craft is being found out. There is a
small public growing up that has discrimination enough to want good
work. Honest books begin to sell a little. Honest painting that isn’t
just pretty picture making begins to sell. Puritanism, as such, is
pretty well licked. It cannot any longer so easily suppress books of
artistic merit because some housewife is afraid the morals of her
daughter, who has just come home from the movies or the Follies, will be
ruined by being told how babies happen to be born. The force of the New
England moralistic culture is spent. Today in America any man of talent
who writes a book that is significant, a work of art, can get it
published and there will be critics to acclaim him. The real pioneering
for the better workmen has been done by men like Whitman and Dreiser for
the writers, and others like Stieglitz, Marin and the critics Rosenfeld,
Cheney and others for the painters.

If you want to do good work and can pick up a living in some way there
will be people to recognize what you are trying to do and perhaps no man
has a right to ask more than that. There are ways to get moments of
happiness out of life other than by making money and being successful
and the men who grind out second-rate flashy stories for the magazines
have their bad moments. They are not really happy men. It is no fun,
believe me, to wake up in the middle of the night and to realize that
you have sold out your own craft.

For it is as true as there is a sun in the sky that men cannot live in
the end without love of craft. It is to the man what love of children is
to the woman. When you are considering what it is that makes the younger
generation so restless, what makes the workers on your buildings and in
your factories such indifferent workmen, what makes so much of
contemporary art cheap and transitory, consider also what the
industrial age has tended to do to this old love of craft so deeply
rooted in men.

It is a dangerous process. Soil the workman’s tools and materials long
enough and he may turn and kill you. You are striking at the very root
of the man’s being.

However, I do not want to be sensational. In spite of the growth of
standardization there are for me many hopeful signs. Men are becoming
increasingly conscious of what is being done to them. The very man who
lends his talents to cheapness is unconvinced. He will come to you in
private with an apology. “I have to live,” he will say. “I have a wife
and children. I am only doing cheap work for the time being. When I have
made a little money I intend to do some honest, decent work.”

In reality I think many men of talent might be saved for the doing of
good work in the arts if the whole situation could be clearly stated.
Too often the younger man or woman who has talent does not get the
situation in hand until he is too old to save himself. We have all been
brought up with the notion, firmly planted in us, that to succeed in a
material sense is the highest end for a life. Our fathers tell us that.
Often our mothers tell us so. Schools and universities often enough
teach the same lesson. We hear it on all sides and when we are young and
uncertain our very youthful humbleness often enough betrays us. Are we
to set ourselves up against the opinions of our elders? How are we to
know that truth to ourselves, to the work of our own hands, to our own
inner impulses, is the most vital thing in life? It has become almost a
truism here in America that no man does good work in the arts until he
is past forty. Nearly all the so called Moderns, the younger men, so
called, are already gray. It takes a long time for most men to get
ground under their feet, to find out a little their own truth in life.

The effort to find out the truth is what is called the Modern Movement.
It is growing. Do not have any doubt about that.

Let me state the matter again. It cannot be stated too often. The
writer, the painter, the musician, the practitioner of any of the arts
who wants to do real work and honest work has got to put money making
aside. He has got to forget it. There is but one way in which the young
man or woman of talent can defeat the corrupting influence of the
present day magazines and most of the book publishers and that is by
forgetting their existence and giving all his attention to his work. And
again let me say that when I speak of corrupting influence I am not
speaking of the men who run these institutions as corrupt individuals.
I am speaking only in the workman’s sense. I am speaking only of the
workman in relation to his tools and materials.

Consider for a moment the materials of the prose writer, the teller of
tales. His materials are human lives. To him these figures of his fancy,
these people who live in his fancy should be as real as living people.
He should be no more ready to sell them out than he would sell out his
men friends or the woman he loves. To take the lives of these people and
bend or twist them to suit the needs of some cleverly thought out plot
to give your readers a false emotion is as mean and ignoble as to sell
out living men or women. For the writer there is no escape, as there is
no real escape for any craftsman. If you handle your materials in a
cheap way you become cheap. The need of making a living may serve you as
an excuse but it will not save you as a craftsman. Nothing really will
save you if you go cheap with tools and materials. Do cheap work and you
are yourself cheap. That is the truth.

To speak again of the way out for the Moderns--for the young man or the
young woman who wishes to do work for which he need not, in the end and
when the temporary acclaim that so often follows cheap and flashy work
has passed, be ashamed, well, there is one. In America it is not too
difficult to make a living. Mr. Henry Mencken says that in America any
man not a complete fool cannot help make a living, and there is some
truth in what he says. If you have no money and no one will give you
any, make your living in some other way and keep the real side of
yourself for the honest work you want to do in your own craft. There are
worse fates than being poor. If you have talent do not sell out your
birthright. My own belief is that there never was a people in the world
more anxious for men of talent to stay on the track and be true to the
crafts than we Americans. We all know something is wrong with the flood
of cheap work we are always getting. The literary clubs and the various
kinds of culture clubs that spring up everywhere are perhaps rather
silly in some of their gropings but they mean something. Often enough
the man who spends all of his own life absorbed in money making would
really like his wife and children to have something else as an end in
life. I suspect that is the real reason there are so many young men and
women in colleges who have no real interest in scholarship. They want
something and their parents want something for them. Is it any wonder
they do not know what they want?

At bottom Americans are kind. They are good natured. So anxious are we
as a people for men of talent that it takes but the merest show of
talent to get recognition among us. Why, any man or woman who wants to
be respected has but to set himself up as a poet. He does not need to
write poetry. Let him write a few verses. We will all invite him to dine
with us, we will put up with his idiosyncracies and small vanities, we
will nurse and feed him like a very babe.

And if he is a musician or a young painter we will, as likely as not,
shell out our money and send him off to Paris to become as commonplace
and unreal and successful as an artist as the very people we have been
talking about here today.

But my preaching on this subject had better come to an end. It is a
subject on which books might be written. When your young man or woman
has made the sacrifices for the sake of a craft that I have spoken of as
necessary--and they are not really sacrifices at all--the struggle has
but begun. There remains the question of talent and if you have talent
that doesn’t settle the matter.

There is no agreement among artists as to the ends they are seeking, no
absolute standards. “A. E.”, the famous Irish publicist, painter and
poet once said that a literary movement consisted of several men of
talent living at the same time and cordially hating each other.

That is the truth and yet it is not quite true. What it really means is
that when men are devoted to their work there will still remain a wide
difference of opinion as to methods, treatments of the subject, the
baffling question of form achieved or not achieved--the question of when
a craftsman’s work becomes also a work of art. These are old questions
about which all craftsmen have always struggled among themselves. It is
all a queer and fascinating game just as life itself is queer and
fascinating.

The real reward I fancy lies just in the work itself, nowhere else. If
you cannot get it there, you will not get it at all.

And speaking for my craft I can say that it is tremendously worth while.
You are undertaking a task that can never be finished. You are starting
on a road that has no end. The longest life will be too short to ever
really get you anywhere near what you want. And that I should say is the
best part of the story.

                         _One thousand copies
                    of this book have been printed
                 for The Lantern Press, San Francisco,
                      (Gelber, Lilienthal, Inc.)
                      by Edwin & Robert Grabhorn.
                  Nine hundred & fifty copies are on
                           B. R. Book Paper,
                       numbered from 51 to 1000,
                  and fifty on Japan Vellum, numbered
                            from 1 to 50._

                            [Illustration]

                         _This is copy number_
                                  185

                  *       *       *       *       *
       Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

                  ever do as as=> ever do as {pg 23}

               worked in the the=> worked in the {pg 26}

        no absollute standards=> no absolute standards {pg 43}






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MODERN WRITER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


