The Project Gutenberg eBook of The brother's return, and other stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The brother's return, and other stories

Author: A. L. O. E.

Release date: November 13, 2023 [eBook #72110]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: T. Nelson and Sons


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROTHER'S RETURN, AND OTHER STORIES ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: SARAH MAY'S KINDNESS REMEMBERED.]



                                  THE

                            BROTHER'S RETURN

                           AND OTHER STORIES.


                                   BY

                               A. L. O. E.,

              AUTHOR OF "FAIRY FRISKET," "FAIRY KNOW-A-BIT,"
                          "THE GIANT-KILLER,"
                               ETC. ETC.



                                London:
                 T. NELSON AND SONS, PATERNOSTER ROW.
                       EDINBURGH; AND NEW YORK.

                                 1886.




                               CONTENTS.

THE BROTHER'S RETURN

BLACK YARN AND BLUE

THE SHEPHERD'S DOG

WHAT BIRD WOULD YOU BE?

THE HERO AND THE HEROINE

BEWARE OF THE WOLF



                          THE BROTHER'S RETURN
                           AND OTHER STORIES.

The Brother's Return.

"I COULD have been sure that John's house stood here," murmured Ralph
Daines to himself as he looked around. "I know that it stood by the
turn of a road, just as one came in sight of the church, and that it
had a clump of trees in front, just like these before me. Ah! Well,
well," he added, "it's more than twenty years since I turned away from
my brother's door—turned away in anger—and twenty years will bring
changes. Perhaps I've mistaken the place, after all. I stayed but a
short time with John, so that I never knew his home well. In twenty
years, one may forget; yes, one may forget a spot, but there are some
things which never can be forgotten, however long we may live."

And amongst those things which rested upon Ralph's mind was his quarrel
with his brother, Long John—a quarrel so sharp, that, after the two had
parted, they had never seen nor written to each other again. For twenty
years and more, Ralph had dwelt in a distant land, and had never so
much as sent a letter to inquire after the welfare of the brother whom
he had left in England. But when Ralph at last returned to his native
isle, his heart began to yearn towards the only near relation whom he
had upon earth. His anger had been softened by time; and Ralph thought
that his brother's home should be his home, and that, though they had
parted in anger, they might yet meet again in affection.

Ralph Daines, after leaving his luggage at the inn nearest to the place
where his brother had dwelt, set out on foot for the house, being sure
that he knew the road well enough to enable him to find it without
much trouble. But the traveller was perplexed, when he came near the
spot where he thought that the house should be, to see only waste land
overgrown with thistles and charlock, with bits of a tumble-down fence
which could not keep out some sheep that were grazing where once a
garden had been.

"Perhaps I've taken the wrong road, after all; perhaps I should have
turned to the left after passing the mile-stone," mused Ralph. "I
wish now that I had inquired the way at the inn, but I thought that I
could not miss it. However, it matters little, for here comes a child
tripping along the path over yon meadow. She perhaps may be able to
tell me the way to the house of John Daines."

Ralph leaned over the rough paling which bordered the meadow, and
waited till the little girl whom he saw carrying a bundle of fagots
should come up to the place where he stood. The child looked poor, but
her dress was neat, and her cheeks were as rosy as the flowers which
she had stuck in her bosom.

"I say, my little friend," began Ralph, as soon as the child could hear
him, "is there not a lonely house near this place, with red tiles and a
porch, and a poultry-yard behind it?"

"I dun no, sir," said the child.

"Was there not once such a house on the plot of waste land behind me?"

"I dun no," repeated the child, who was scarcely four years old.

"I do not seem likely to get much information out of this little one,"
said Ralph to himself; "but she may know people, though she does not
know places.—Does a Mr. Daines live near this spot?" he inquired.

The child looked doubtful for a minute, then muttered, "Dun no;" and
seemed inclined to pass on.

"Wait a bit, little one," said Ralph. "You may perhaps have heard of
Mr. Daines as 'Long John,' for he often went by that name!"

A gleam of intelligence broke at once over the rosy young face. "Eh!
Yes; he be father!" she cried. "Nobody don't call him mister."

"Your father!" exclaimed Ralph in surprise; for the speech and dress of
the little girl were those of a poor peasant child—not such as might
have been expected in one brought up in the comfortable house of his
brother. "Do you mean to say that Long John Daines is your father?"

The child nodded her head.

"And where is he now?" cried Ralph.

The little girl raised her sunburnt arm and pointed towards the church
which appeared at a little distance.

"Can you take me to the place, my little friend? I will help you over
the stile, and carry your fagots for you, and you shall have a bright
new shilling when we arrive at your home."

The eyes of the child brightened. She let the stranger lift her over
the stile, and kiss her, and gaze in her face—saying that her eyes were
just like her father's. She then tripped merrily along by his side, and
in reply to Ralph's questions, told him that her name was Mary, and
that sometimes she was called Polly. She did not know whether she had
any other name, but she knew that she was Long John's little child, for
all the folk knew that.

"Where is your mother?" asked Ralph. His brother had not been married
when they had parted, twenty years back.

"Mother is with father," said Mary.

"And is that their home?" inquired Ralph, as he approached a pretty
farmhouse which stood a little way back from the road.

"Oh no!" cried Mary, in surprise at the question. "Not a big home like
that."

Ralph's face became graver and sadder, for the farmhouse was not so
large as the dwelling in which he had last seen his brother. It was
clear that Long John could not have prospered in life; and this made
Ralph more deeply regret having so long harboured anger against him.

"Why had I the folly—the worse than folly—to keep up a quarrel with
my own brother!" thought he. "Poor John has gone down in the world;
I shall find him, perhaps, in distress. He has needed the help of a
brother, and knew not where a letter would find me.—Has your father to
work very hard?" he inquired.

"Oh no," replied the child again, with a look of surprise.

The mind of Ralph was relieved. "Then he is never very hungry?" said he.

"Never hungry," answered Mary gravely.

"It is a comfort that John has not known actual want," thought Ralph.
"If I find him—as I expect—a poor man, I, with plenty of money in my
pocket, shall be able to start him again in business."

Ralph walked for some time in silence by his little companion, for his
thoughts were full of the days of old. He remembered how he had romped
and played with his brother when they had been children together; and
he remembered, alas! How often their sports had ended in quarrelling
and fighting. Both were proud, passionate boys; neither liked to
give in; neither could bear to ask pardon of the brother whom he
had wronged. The last sad quarrel between Ralph and his brother had
followed on a thousand lesser ones, which had embittered the lives of
both.

"Ah, how often our poor mother urged us to love one another!" thought
Ralph, now a worn elderly man, as he recalled the days of his youth.
"How she spoke to us of the meekness and gentleness which should be
shown by every Christian, and taught us that he that is slow to anger
is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that
taketh a city! What grief it would have given to our mother could she
have known that, after her death, her sons would be more than twenty
years without seeing or hearing tidings of each other! But now I will
make amends for the past. Poor John shall find that for him and his
family I have an open purse and an open heart. I hope that the quarrel
which has kept us so long asunder may be the last which shall ever
arise between me and my only brother."

Ralph was so much engaged with thoughts such as these, that he scarcely
noticed that his little guide was now taking him through the village
churchyard, until she suddenly stopped quite still, which made her
companion stop also. Mary pointed to a mound of turf, over which the
long grass was growing. There was a low head-stone by the mound, with a
short inscription upon it. Ralph started and trembled when his glance
fell on that stone. It bore two names: the first that of MARY DAINES,
who had died, aged twenty; the next that of her husband, JOHN DAINES,
who (as the date showed) had died not a year before his brother's
return. Little Mary was too young to spell out the words on the stone;
but she had been taught to look on that grassy mound as the home of her
father and mother.

Great was the surprise of the child to see the burst of grief to which
her quiet, grave companion gave way. The little one knew not how great
had been her own loss; her childish tears for her father had long
since been dried; to her, there was no deep sadness in the peaceful
churchyard, or the grassy mound on which daisies grew. Mary wondered
why the tall stranger should fall on his knees by the mound, and bury
his face in his hands, and sob as if he were a child. Mary knew not
what a bitter thing it is to repent too late of unkindness shown to a
brother; to wish—but to wish in vain—to recall words which should never
have been spoken, deeds which should never have been done.

Ralph would at that moment have given all that he possessed upon earth
to have been able to say to himself, "There was never anything but
kindness and love between me and him whom I shall see no more upon
earth!"

At length, Ralph arose from the grave, with a heavy heart, and eyes
swollen with weeping. He took Mary up in his arms, pressed her close
to his heart, then covered her face with kisses. He was thankful that
there was yet one way left by which he could show affection to his lost
brother; he would act the part of a father to John's little orphan
girl. Ralph promised by his brother's tomb that he would watch over
Mary, and care for her and love her, as if she were his own child.

And well did Ralph keep that promise,—well did he supply a parent's
place to Mary. Not only did he feed and clothe her, and give her a
happy home, but he earnestly tried to bring her up as a Christian
child. He taught his little niece to give and forgive, to bear and
forbear, and never to lie down at night to sleep before she had asked
forgiveness of any one whom she had offended during the day.

"Oh, my child!" Ralph would say with a sigh to Mary, whenever she
showed any sign of a proud or passionate temper, "never let anger have
time to grow, for its fruit is sin and bitter sorrow. Pray for grace
that you may be able to keep the blessed command, 'Let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from
you, with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, hath forgiven
you.'"



Black Yarn and Blue.

SOFTLY outside Mary's cottage fell the rain, the gentle April rain; and
round and round went the wheel within the cottage, where Mary sat at
her spinning. Never did her husband wear a pair of socks that was not
of Mary's spinning and knitting. The hum of the cottager's busy wheel
was a pleasant sound; and cheerful and bright looked Mary's face as she
busily spun her blue yarn.

But the face of her son Jemmy was neither cheerful nor bright, as he
sat, with his crutches beside him, in front of the fire, with his back
turned towards his mother. First Jemmy yawned, then yawned again, and
then he took to sighing; and his sigh had so dreary a sound, that it
drew the attention of Mary.

"What are you thinking of, Jemmy, my lad?" asked the mother, stopping
the wheel for a minute.

"I am thinking of all my troubles," was the mournful reply, uttered
slowly, and in a tone most plaintive.

"Well, the accident to your leg was a great trouble; but the poor
leg is getting better,—the doctor says that you will soon throw your
crutches away," observed Mary cheerfully; and round again went her
wheel.

"I was not thinking of great troubles, but of little troubles," said
Jemmy; "this has been an unlucky day. It rains when I want to go out."

"Oh! The blessed rain, which will do the country such good!"
interrupted his mother.

"And I've lost my silver penny," continued Jemmy. "I cannot find it,
though I've hunted in every nook and cranny."

"Certainly that is no great trouble," laughed Mary. "Wait till I've
spun this yarn, and I'll help you to look for your silver penny. And
what is your next trouble, my boy?"

"That pretty plant which the gardener gave me is dying; it is curling
up all its leaves," sighed doleful Jemmy, glancing towards a flowerpot
which stood on the sill.

"I daresay that it only wants a little water," said Mary. "See how the
spring shower is making the fields and hedges green! Your poor prisoner
in the flowerpot has not had a drop to drink since yesterday, when you
brought it home. Have you any more troubles, my boy?" The question was
so playfully asked, that Jemmy felt rather ashamed of his sighing and
grumbling.

"Only that Tom is unkind; he is always teasing me to come out and fly
the kite with him, when he knows that I have a lame leg. He said, when
he went out this morning, that my coddling at home was all nonsense;
that he'll make a bonfire of my crutches some day, and that I never
shall miss them! It was very, very unkind."

"Tom is a little too fond of joking; but I really don't see anything in
that joke to set you sighing," said Mary, laughing. "My dear boy, you
are much too ready to set that brain of yours spinning gloomy thoughts.
Suppose that I were to put black wool upon my wheel, what should I spin
but black yarn, and your father would have nought but black stockings
to wear. Why should one choose a dark colour, when it costs nothing
to have a cheerful one? So with the yarn of thought. Take something
pleasant to think of, something bright to turn round and round in your
mind. Suppose now that, instead of your troubles, big or little, you
take to counting up all the kindnesses which you have received since
yesterday morning."

Jemmy had shifted his position, so that he was now sitting looking at
his mother; and a sight of her cheerful face was in itself enough to
brighten him up a little. Still, it was rather in a grumbling manner
that he replied, "I don't know what kindnesses I have to count up. No
one is ever kind to me,—except, of course, you and my father."

"We count for something," cried Mary. "But think a little longer, my
lad—turn your wheel round a little faster." And the spinner suited her
action to her words.

"Well, Tom did mend my kite this morning; I suppose that you would call
that kind," observed Jemmy.

"Now were you not needlessly spinning black yarn instead of blue, when
you thought of Tom's rough joke instead of his real act of kindness?"
asked Mary.

"And perhaps it was kind in the gardener to give me that plant; only
it's dying now," said Jemmy.

"It was not dying when he gave it; I've seldom seen a prettier flower.
Have you no other kind deeds to remember?" asked his mother.

It was a new thing to Jemmy to count up kindnesses instead of troubles,
and he rubbed his forehead, as if rather perplexed.

"My grandfather gave me a shilling yesterday," he said at last, "and
that was a kindness."

"And you chose to think more of the penny lost than of the shilling
received! How fond some people are of choosing the black yarn!" cried
Mary.

"There's no one else that has done anything kind to me; I can remember
nothing more," said Jemmy, after a moment's reflection.

"I can remember something for you, then. Who taught you reading and
spelling yesterday afternoon?"

"Oh, Sarah May," answered the boy. "But that is nothing new; she has
done that ever since the hurt in my leg stopped my going to school."

"Yes, she has shown kindness to you every day for the last ten weeks,
and therefore you have forgotten to think of it as kindness at all. O
Jemmy, Jemmy. Here is a sad choosing of the black yarn instead of the
blue!"

"Teaching me costs Sarah nothing," began Jemmy; but he stopped short,
for he could not help feeling a little ashamed of such ungrateful words.

"That is an odd thing to say!" cried Mary. "Does not teaching cost
Sarah trouble and time; and is it not for time and trouble that every
workman and workwoman is paid, except those who, like Sarah, take to
helping others from kindness? I know that Sarah went in her old dress
to church last Sunday, because she had not had time to make up her new
one; I know that she has stopped at home to teach you, when she might
have been enjoying a pleasant walk with her brother. I suppose that my
lame kiddie thinks so little of all this kindness because Sarah is good
and patient, and never grumbles at small troubles like somebody that I
know."

Mary went on with her spinning faster than before, leaving Jemmy to
turn over in his mind her little reproof. Perhaps the yarn of his
thoughts was dark enough at first; for Jemmy was mortified to find what
a silly, discontented, ungrateful boy he had been. He sat silent for
several minutes, and then saying, "I had better water that plant," he
rose from his seat, and went slowly up to the water-jug, which stood in
a corner of the room.

As soon as Jemmy had lifted the jug, he uttered an exclamation of
pleasure. "Oh, here is my silver penny!" he cried. "It has been lying
all the time under the jug!"

And in the jug all the time had been lying the water which was all that
was needed to make the delicate plant revive, stretch out again its
curling leaves, and lift up its drooping blossoms. Jemmy felt pleasure
in watering his flower; to do so, he thought, was almost like giving
drink to a thirsty animal.

Jemmy was all the more pleased, because he had a little plan in his
mind, which he carried out on the following day. When his mother had
set him to count the kindnesses which he had received, she had taught
him also to feel grateful for them.

But the little spinning-wheel of his brain did not rest there, nor stop
till Jemmy had found out some way of showing that he was grateful. It
was indeed but little that the lame boy could do; but when he carried
to Sarah May a nosegay of all his best flowers, and saw her smile
of pleasure as she received it, a joyful sense of having done what
was kind and right filled the heart of the grateful boy. The yarn of
Jemmy's thoughts then seemed to have become as clear and blue as the
sky.

Dear reader, what thoughts is your little brain now spinning? When you
gratefully remember kindnesses from earthly friends, blue and bright is
the hue of your thoughts; but when you are also thankful for all the
countless blessings bestowed by your Heavenly Friend, then the thread
is all turned into gold!



The Shepherd's Dog.

"WELL, uncle, and if I did kick the little beast, what of that? He's
only a dog, a mere shepherd's dog," said Steenie Steers, in a tone
of contempt, as he looked down on the rough little creature that
had crouched for protection beside the chair of his master, Farmer
Macalpine.

"And what is a dog—a shepherd's dog—but a useful creature, a grateful
creature, that might teach a lesson to many of a nobler race?" said the
farmer tartly.

Macalpine had a face almost as sharp and eyes almost as keen as those
of his four footed companion, and his shock of tawny hair was almost as
thick and rough as the coat of his faithful Trusty. There was nothing
smooth about Farmer Macalpine, as his spoiled nephew found to his cost
whenever he and his uncle chanced to be together.

Steenie Steers thought himself a very fine fellow indeed; in this, as
in many other things, he had formed a very different opinion from that
of Farmer Macalpine. Though Steenie was not yet quite twelve years of
age, he already put on all the airs of a grown-up fop. Macalpine had
found the boy lolling in the only easy-chair in the room of his aunt,
Miss Steers, with his silver-tipped cane in his hand; and Steenie had
hardly risen to welcome his uncle, though he had not met him for more
than a week.

"I've come to see your Aunt Elizabeth, Steenie; is she at home?" asked
Macalpine.

"Aunt Bess—why, no; she's out somewhere," answered the nephew. "I dare
say that she's trotted over to the doctor's," he added, in a tone of
utter indifference.

"Is her head better? How did she sleep last night?" inquired the farmer.

"How can I tell? I've just come in from a stroll in the woods," replied
Steenie.

"I suppose that you did not go on your stroll without your breakfast;
you must have seen your aunt then," said Macalpine, in his rather
snappish manner.

"I wasn't down to breakfast till old Aunt Bess had done hers, and gone
out," answered Steenie. "I was up late last night at the Burnsides,"
added the boy, with a yawn.

"I've heard your aunt say half-a-dozen times that she did not like your
going to those Burnsides," said the farmer.

Steenie laughed and shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not bound to care for
all her likes or dislikes either," muttered the boy, tapping his front
teeth with his silver-tipped cane.

Macalpine's sharp keen eyes looked sharper and keener than ever as he
observed, "After your aunt's bringing you up, and doing everything
for you these ten years, ever since you could toddle alone, I think
that she has a good claim at least to your obedience, if you have no
affection to give."

Apparently Master Steenie did not relish his uncle's remark, for,
perhaps to turn the conversation, he began teasing the farmer's dog.
Macalpine's angry remonstrance led to the reply of his nephew with
which my little story begins.

"I wonder that you care to keep such a rough ugly cur as that Trusty,"
observed Steenie Steers.

"I keep him for some use," answered the farmer. "Trusty guards my flock
attends to my call; by day or by night; in snow, rain, or hail, he
is always ready to do my bidding. He's a good old fellow," continued
Macalpine, stooping to pat his rugged friend, who licked the farmer's
hand in return. "I've reared him from a puppy."

"I should not care to rear such a common kind of dog as that," observed
Steenie, who prided himself on being a dog-fancier. "If he were a King
Charles spaniel now—"

"Or a pug or a poodle," interrupted the farmer; "I should not consider
him worth the rearing. I care for use, not for show."

"Your favourite does not cost you much, I'll be bound!" said Steenie
Steers, with a saucy laugh.

"Trusty costs me nothing," answered Macalpine, "for he is content with
a few bones, and fairly earns what he gets. But a friend of mine once
reared a puppy that would, perhaps, be a puppy just to your taste.
Plenty of care and pains she bestowed on the useless creature, and
stuffed it with food more than enough. I consider that much of that
good feeding was downright waste, seeing what the puppy was to turn
out, and that my poor friend really stinted herself to pamper her pet."

"Did the creature devour so much, then?" inquired young Steers.

"Why, he must have gobbled up, during his training,—let me see—let
me see," and Macalpine rubbed his shaggy head to help out his
calculations,—"the pet must have gobbled up as good as three hundred
big legs of mutton!"

"I say!" exclaimed Steenie, in much amazement. "Your friend's pet must
have been no pup, but a lion, and one with a monstrous appetite, too!
Such a brute as that would soon eat his mistress out of house and home."

"He did not eat all the mutton in a day—or a week—or a month; he took
his time about it," said the farmer, with a low chuckling laugh. "But
my friend's hungry pet did not live on mutton alone; we must add to the
meat some three hundred pounds of fresh butter!"

"A dainty dog!" exclaimed Steenie.

"And not much less than a thousand loaves of white bread," said
Macalpine "with tubs of milk, and casks of beer, and I don't know how
many plum-cakes, seed-cakes, iced cakes, and all sorts of sweeties
besides!"

"You are cracking a joke on me, uncle," said Steenie. "I'll answer for
it that your friend's pet was never a puppy at all."

"I could not answer for it that he is not one now, and a very useless
puppy, and a very ungrateful puppy," cried the farmer, rising from his
seat. "There, I see my sister coming," he added, as he looked through
the open door-way; "Trusty, you and I will go and meet her."

Trusty, ever ready, sprang up and followed his master.

Steenie's face had grown exceedingly red at the words of Macalpine;
the boy bit hard the silver tip of his cane. He could now see clearly
enough what his uncle's meaning had been. Steenie himself was the idle,
ungrateful puppy, that, after having been fed for ten long years on his
kind aunt's bounty, had made no kind of return for all the care and
love which she had lavished upon him.

I must say that Farmer Macalpine had a rude and disagreeable way of
giving reproof; he did not, as all Christians ought to do, speak the
truth in love. His manners and his words were as rough as his hair. We
may have no such plain-spoken uncle to remind us of things which we do
not care to remember, but it is well for all who have been brought up
by parents or friends in comfortable homes, all who have been fed and
clothed year after year by the kindness of others, to ask themselves
what return they are making for all that they have received.

I fear that Steenie Steers is not the only boy who deserves the name of
"a very useless puppy," and who might, if he would, learn a lesson from
Trusty, the old shepherd's dog.



What Bird Would You Be?

"A NEW game for a rainy day!" cried Clara, clapping her hands to
command silence amongst the merry little group of children who, tired
of active romps, now clustered around her.

"It must be a quiet one, for the little ones are out of breath
with Blindman's Buff, and Sophy, I see, is fanning herself on the
sofa. Here, Tom and Felix, draw in chairs to form a circle; the two
footstools will do nicely for Jessie and Minnie—little seats will suit
little people. Tall Phil, you may perch on the music-stool, and look
down on us all, if you like it."

The circle of children was soon formed, all waiting till Clara should
tell them how to begin their new game.

Clara took a rich red rose from a vase which stood near. "I am going
to ask a question," said she, "and to the one who shall offer the best
reason for his or her answer, the rose shall be given as a prize."

Tom, a merry rosy-cheeked boy, laughed as he stooped and whispered to
his next neighbour, Annie. "If the rose were to be won by giving a long
jump, or a hard pull, or a good knockdown blow, I'd have a chance,"
said he; "but you could wring out butter from a broom-stick sooner than
a rhyme or a reason from me."

"Let's hear the question," cried Phil.

"If you were to be changed into a bird, what bird would you choose to
become?" asked Clara.

"An eagle," shouted out Master Tom.

"Your reason?" inquired the young lady.

"Well," drawled out the boy, "suppose because he is the biggest and
strongest of birds, and able to whack all the rest."

"The eagle is neither the biggest nor the strongest of birds," cried
Phil. "The ostrich, condor, and albatross are all larger, and some more
powerful than the eagle."

Tom shrugged his shoulders and shook his head; had he not been fonder
of boxing than of books, he might have said that the huge condor, being
a vulture, is of the same order, and therefore may be called first
cousin to the eagle.

"Jessie, dear, what would you be?" asked Clara of the smallest child in
the room.

"I'd be a hummingbird," lisped Jessie, "'cause it's the prettiest of
all 'ittle birds."

"Pretty, yes," observed Annie, her sister; "but I think that its
prettiness is rather an evil to it than a good. If you were a
hummingbird, Jessie, you would very likely be caught, killed, and
stuffed for the sake of your beauty."

"And what says our little Minnie?" inquired Clara of a plump, fair,
flaxen-haired child who sat on a footstool next to Jessie, with her arm
round her young companion.

"I'd be a beauty swan, swimming about amongst the lilies, under the
shady trees," said the child, who had admired the swan and his mate,
with their little cygnets, floating on the lake, as she had seen them
that morning.

"Give us your reason," said Clara.

"I like paddling about in the water, it's so nice," was the simple
reply.

"Ay, you would like it in summer," cried Phil, "when the lilies are in
flower, and the trees in leaf. But I know a little lady who in winter
does not care to stir off the hearth-rug, and is ready to cry if sent
out into the cold. She would not then care to be a swan, and paddle
about on the ice."

"I'd rather be a swallow," cried Felix, "and escape altogether from
winter with its frosts and its snows. A life of active pleasure, not
of lazy enjoyment, for me! I like to travel and see distant lands and
what fun it would be just to spread one's wings and be off for France,
Italy, or Algiers, without any trouble of packing a trunk, with nothing
heavier to carry than feathers, and no railway tickets to pay for, or
bills at hotels on the way!"

"Were you a swallow, you'd have a bill wherever you flew," laughed Phil.

"Oh! A precious light one," said Felix gaily.

"As for me, I'd prefer the life of a lark," cried Phil. "I'd sooner
mount high than fly far; and I'd like to whistle my song from the
clouds. To my mind, the little sky-lark is the merriest bird under the
sun."

"If you were to be changed into a bird, Sophy, what bird would you be?"
asked Clara of a rather affected little girl, who sat twirling the bead
bracelet which she wore on her arm.

Sophy drooped her head a little on one side, as if it rather troubled
her to give an opinion,—and she thought herself too much of a fine lady
to join in so childish a game. She glanced up, however, at the splendid
rose which Clara held in her hand, and thinking that it would look very
pretty in her own hair, prepared to answer the question.

"What bird would you be?" repeated the boys, who were growing a little
impatient.

"The nightingale," said Sophy in an affected tone, again looking down,
and twirling her beads.

"You must give your reason for your choice," observed Clara.

"Every one admires the nightingale's sweet notes," said Sophy, glancing
up at the rose.

"Oh, ho! There's a fine reason!" laughed Phil. "I'd sing like the lark
in the joy of my heart, with the sunshine about me; but Sophy would
sing for other folk to admire her trills and her shakes, and cry out,
'I never heard anything so fine!'"

Sophy looked vexed at the remark, for Phil had hit on her weakness; the
vanity which is always seeking for praise. Clara, who liked all to be
peace and good-humour, turned at once the attention of the little party
in another direction, by addressing Annie, the only one of the circle
who had not yet been questioned.

"What bird would you be, dear?" asked she.

"I think, an eider-duck," replied Annie.

Her answer was received with a burst of laughter.

"A duck—to dabble in mud, and gobble up snails and frogs!" cried Phil.

"Or be gobbled up itself, with green pease, and admired as a very nice
bird!" exclaimed Felix.

"Ducks are very pretty—almost as pretty as swans," lisped little
Jessie, who did not like her sister to be laughed at.

"I do not think that eider-ducks are pretty," said Annie; "I did not
choose the bird for its beauty."

"You have not given us a reason for your choice yet," observed Clara.

"I think the eider-ducks useful," said Annie; "the delightful quilt,
so light yet so warm, which has been such a comfort to mamma in her
illness, was made from their down. But my chief reason for liking
the bird is its unselfishness. You remember, Jessie," added Annie,
addressing her sister, "what mamma told us about the eider-ducks that
are found in Scotland, Norway, and Iceland?"

"Oh yes; I know all about them!" cried Jessie. "The good mother duck
pulls off the down from her own breast to line her nest, and make it
soft and warm for her baby ducklings; and when people steal away the
down, she pulls more and more, till she leaves herself bare,—and then
her husband, the drake, gives his nice down to help her."

"When mamma told me all this," said Annie, "it reminded me of the
beautiful story of the Highland mother who was overtaken by a terrible
snowstorm, as she travelled with her babe in her arms. The mother
stripped off her shawl, as the duck does her down, and wrapped it
close—oh, so close!—round her child, and hid him in a cleft in a rock.
The baby, wrapped in his mother's shawl, was found alive where she
had left him; but the poor woman—the loving woman—" Annie's voice
failed her, and she did not finish the touching tale of the mother who
perished in the cold from which she had guarded her child.

"Now let us compare the various reasons which have been given for
choosing different birds," said Clara, "that we may decide upon which
is the best one. The eagle was chosen for size and strength, the little
hummingbird for beauty; one liked the swan's life of easy enjoyment,
another the swallow's of active amusement. The lark was chosen for
cheerfulness, the nightingale for the admiration which he gains, the
eider-duck for the unselfishness which she shows. Now which of our
little party has given the best reason for a choice?"

"Annie! Annie!" cried most of the children—though Sophy murmured
something about "an ugly waddling creature that can say nothing but
'quack!'"

"Then I think that we agree that Annie has won the rose," said Clara.


And if, before the day was over, that sweet rose found its way to a
chamber of sickness, and was laid on an eider-down quilt within reach
of a lady's thin hand, the reader will easily guess how it came there.
Annie was one not only to admire but to imitate the unselfishness of
the bird that finds its pleasure in caring for the comfort of others,
instead of seeking its own.



The Hero and the Heroine.

"HARRY was a hero, if ever there was one!" cried Theodore Vassy, after
he had been for some time silently looking at a print of the prince
who was afterwards so famous as Henry V. The print represented the
well-known anecdote of Harry's trying on the crown of England by the
sick-bed of his father.

"I never admire that story much," observed Theodore's eldest sister
Alice, raising her eyes from a volume which she had been reading. "A
son finds, as he thinks, that his father has just died; and, instead of
bursting into tears (like our good Queen when she gained a throne by
the death of her uncle), Prince Harry's first thought is to try on the
crown! I do not wonder," added Alice with a smile, "that when the poor
sick king woke from his deathlike sleep, he was little pleased with his
son."

"But the son, if the story be true, made such a noble excuse for
himself, that even his father was satisfied," said Theodore. "Harry had
not tried on the crown because he was in the least hurry to wear it,
but because—"

Alice shook her head, laughing. "Harry's excuses may have been clever,
but I am afraid that they were but false ones," said she; "for when he
was once on the throne, one crown was not enough for King Harry: he
must carry sword and fire into poor France, because he wanted to have
two!"

"Girls know nothing, understand nothing, about heroes," said Theodore
in a tone of contempt.

"Girls have been heroines," replied Alice with some animation. "In this
very book which I have been reading—'Memorials of Agnes Jones'—there is
an anecdote of her courage when she was a child of but eight years old
which might have done credit to a boy of ten, even if he bore the name
of Theodore Vassy," added the elder sister gaily.

Theodore prided himself on his manly spirit, though it was a spirit
which more often carried him into difficulties than bore him bravely
through them. For instance, Theodore had boasted that he would clear
his father's cellar of the troublesome rats that had made it their
home; and he had made an attempt to do so. The boy had even succeeded
in catching a rat by the tail! But no sooner had the fierce little
prisoner turned and bit his captor's finger, than Theodore, giving a
cry of pain, had let the rat go, and had retreated at once from the
cellar, leaving the honours of the battle-field to his small four
footed foe.

Luckily for Theodore, no one had been present to witness the fight; and
the boy took good care not to mention his adventure. Not even Alice
knew where her brother had got the little mark left on his hand by the
teeth of the rat.

"Let's hear your anecdote, if it's worth the hearing," said Theodore
Vassy. "I never yet knew a girl who would not cry at the prick of a
needle."

Alice turned back the pages of the book which she had been reading,
till she came to the part relating to the childhood of Agnes Jones.

"This memoir is written by the sister of Agnes," observed Alice; "and
it is one of the most beautiful books which I ever read in my life."

"And who was this Agnes?" asked Theodore.

"A young lady, the daughter of an officer," replied Alice Vassy. "When
she was a little child, she accompanied her parents to the island of
Mauritius, off the east coast of Africa, where occurred the following
incident, thus related by her sister." And Alice read as follows:—

"At Mauritius, when she was about eight years old, a friend sent her a
present of a young kangaroo from Australia. An enclosure was made for
it in the garden, and Agnes delighted to feed and visit it daily."

"I've seen a kangaroo in the Zoological Gardens," interrupted Theodore.
"It was larger than our big dog, and went springing and jumping on
its long hind legs, as if it were set on springs. I never saw such
a creature for leaping! I was told that the kangaroo has tremendous
strength in those hind legs, and that, when hunted, it makes itself
dangerous even to the dogs. I suppose that this little girl's kangaroo
was very tame as well as young, or she might have had more pain than
pleasure from her plaything." Theodore was thinking of his fight with
the rat.

Alice went on reading the sister's account of the little Agnes and her
pet kangaroo:—

"One day, as she opened the gate, it escaped, and bounded off into our
neighbour's plantation. Agnes followed, fearing it might do mischief,
climbed over the low wall which separated the two gardens, and after a
long chase succeeded in capturing the fugitive. Some minutes afterwards
my mother came into the garden, and was horror-struck to see her
returning from the pursuit—the kangaroo, which she held bravely by
its ears, struggling wildly for freedom, and tearing at her with its
hind feet; while her dress was streaming with blood from the wounds
inflicted by its nails."

"I say!" exclaimed Theodore involuntarily, "I'd have let the horrid
beast go!"

"But she would not do so," continued Alice, still reading, "until she
got it safely into its house; although it was many a long day before
she lost the marks of her battle and its victory."

"She was a gallant little soul!" exclaimed Theodore. "What a pity it is
that Agnes was a girl, and not a boy! For, after all, courage is not of
much use to a woman."

"I am not sure of that," replied Alice; "nor, perhaps, would you think
so, were you to read this beautiful Life. Agnes left a bright, happy
home, to watch as a nurse by the sick-beds of the poor. Though she
was a lady born and bred, she shrank from no drudgery, grumbled at no
hardship: she worked hard, and she worked cheerfully, looking for no
reward upon earth. Agnes had to struggle against great difficulties;
but she mastered them just as she had mastered the kangaroo when she
was a child."

"And got nothing by it," said Theodore Vassy. "One might suffer, and
struggle, and conquer difficulties, if, like Harry the Fifth, one had a
crown to make it worth while."

"There was a crown for Agnes," observed Alice gravely; "but not one
that man could give, or that she could wear upon earth. The artist who
drew that picture—" Alice glanced as she spoke at the print in the hand
of her brother—"has made Prince Henry look upwards, as if praying to
be made worthy to have a crown. Agnes Jones's was a life-long looking
upwards—a life-long trying on, as it were, of the crown prepared for
such as love their Heavenly King;—and I believe," added Alice, as she
closed her volume, "that after her brave struggles and her victories,
Agnes Jones has gone to wear that crown."



Beware of the Wolf.

 YOU never need fear, little children, to meet
 A wolf in the garden, the wood, or the street;
 Red Riding-hood's story is only a fable,—
 I'll give you its moral as well as I'm able:
 Bad Temper's the wolf which we meet everywhere—
 Beware of this wolf! Little children, beware!

 I know of a boy, neither gentle nor wise,
 If you tell him a fault, he gives saucy replies;
 If kept from his way, in a fury he flies—
 Ah! Passion's the wolf with the very large eyes;
 'Tis ready to snap and to trample and tear—
 Beware of this wolf! Little children, beware!

 I know of a girl always trying to learn
 About things with which she should have no concern:
 Such mean Curiosity really appears
 To me like the wolf with the very large ears,
 All pricked up to listen, each secret to share—
 Beware of this wolf! Little children, beware!

 And Greediness, that's like the wolf in the wood
 With the very large mouth, ever prowling for food,
 That eats so much more than for health can be good;
 That would clear a whole pastry-cook's shop if it could;
 That never a dainty to others will spare—
 Beware of this wolf! Little children, beware!

 PASSION, PRYING, and GREEDINESS, each thus appears
 As a wolf with fierce eyes, a large mouth, or big ears;
 They bring to our nurseries fighting and fears,
 They cause bitter quarrelling, trouble, and tears.
 Oh! Chase them and cudgel them back to their lair—
 Beware of the wolves! Little children, beware!








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROTHER'S RETURN, AND OTHER STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


