The Project Gutenberg eBook of The celestial blueprint
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The celestial blueprint

Author: Philip José Farmer

Release date: April 1, 2024 [eBook #73314]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: King-Size Publications, Inc

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CELESTIAL BLUEPRINT ***





                        The Celestial Blueprint

                         By Philip José Farmer

                  The great Vincelleo liked being an
                   artist. It gave him an excuse to
                    turn the universe topsy turvy.

    _Apocalyptical flights of fancy are not unusual in science fiction.
    But when a writer with Philip José Farmer's gift of laughter
    embarks on one the outcome may be impossible to predict. He may
    turn your comfortable world of breakfast, lunch and dinner into
    some incredible rabbit warren in space, where you'll be served
    vitamin pills by March hares which would have made Alice blush. Or
    you may simply meet the great Vincelleo himself._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Fantastic Universe July 1954.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The arrogance with which B. T. Revanche strode through the outer
office of Bioid Electronic was enough to convince anyone that he was
a V.V.I.P. His weasel eyes straying neither to left nor right, long
fat cigar stabbed straight ahead, quill-like hair bristling in all
directions, he was a stout little porcupine of a man. And like that
spear-backed creature, he knew that no one would stop him. If they did,
they'd regret it--so help them!

Very few people ever paced so fearlessly through the waiting rooms
of Bioid. Most persons sat a long time on the "heel-cooling" chairs,
and when they were summoned to enter the Sanctum Sanctorum, they were
seldom escorted by a Bioid treacher.

But B. T. Revanche--contrary to rumor, the initials did not stand for
Blood Thirsty--walked into the skyscraper that overlooked the free
city of Messina, and did not bother to announce himself. Taking it
for granted that he'd be recognized wherever he went, he did not even
switch off his personal anti-espionage field.

Such a gesture of simple courtesy would have seemed to him an affront
to his prestige.

He brushed aside those who looked as if they might get in his way,
stepped into an anti-gravity elevator, and was whisked up fifty stories
to the immense suit of Bioid's GHQ. There a gold-plated treacher picked
him up and preceded him, barking out his name with flattering precision.

"Make way for Signor Revanche! One side or a leg off, please! Lo, he
cometh!"

Revanche frowned, and bit down on his cigar. He didn't like the
slightest suspicion of levity in regard to himself.

Despite a twinge of annoyance, however, he was impressed by the
offices. Blazing slogans hung along the walls: _Bioid is more than skin
deep! Our trinity: Art & Science & Da Vincelleo! Perfect both inside
and out! For the Gods--and Da Vincelleo!_

Diagrams and sketches of the great Messinan's works hung here and
there--drawings of the human body in various positions, along with
pictures of Bioid robots in corresponding postures.

Poised on plastiglass were germanium brains, startlingly life-like
statues that breathed, and a mounted gorilla, last of his species, shot
by the great Da Vincelleo himself. If you stepped on a plate set in the
floor while admiring it, it would reach out for you--reach out and roar
loud enough to scare the shorts off you.

B. T. Revanche paused for an instant before one of the statues,
and manipulated a dial at its base. It was that of an attractive
woman clothed in a simple tunic of green-gold gauze, her limbs
gazelle-slender in the glare.

"Speak to me, baby," he said, rather coarsely.

The plastiskin woman spoke, her lips arching in a seductive smile.
"Good afternoon, man of culture. I am not alive, but there is grace and
beauty in all of Da Vincelleo's creations, and when you look at them
you forget that you have come here to pass an idle hour.

"The veils of the artificial are stripped away, and for a moment you
gaze upon beauty naked and unadorned. Would you not like to take me
into your arms?"

"I sure would, baby!" Revanche whispered.

He knew, of course, that the statue could not hear him. But by timing
his questions to correspond with its disk-recorded utterances an
illusion of conversation could be maintained. To imagine even for a
brief instant that he could bend so lovely a creature to his will
brought out all of the latent sadism in his nature.

"I'm not interested in you as a work of art, baby," he said. "I guess
you know that."

"Pass on, man of culture," the statue said. "You linger too long here.
If you look about you, you will find others more beautiful than I!"

Abruptly the illusion snapped. Scowling, feeling outrageously cheated,
Revanche swung about, and resumed his arrogant stride.

There were many vivoil paintings of scenes that gave the illusion, if
you looked at them obliquely, of leaves fluttering, birds flying, women
walking, and water flowing. All were signed with the name of the famed
poet-scientist-financier-engineer-architect-painter-sculptor-cyberneticist
and lover of the Second Italian Renaissance--Benangelo Michelardo Da
Vincelleo.

There was only one man on Earth who was more widely known, more
powerful. It was a measure of B. T. Revanche's importance that no
practical jokes were played on _him_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Da Vincelleo was famous for his complicated, rubegoldbergish, and
sometimes morbid sense of humor. Visitors had to have strong nerves if
they cared to see him--and survive.

It was not unusual for trap-doors to open beneath their feet and
drop them, kicking and screaming, down a two-story shaft before they
were eased by anti-grav to a slow stop. Or for a visitor to find the
doorknob to the master's office had turned into a shriveled plastic
head. Or to step into what he thought was the office, and find himself
neck-deep in water, or some less acceptable fluid.

If the enraged victim stalked off, Da Vincelleo howled with glee. And
if a lawsuit followed, he had ways of scaring the unhappy wretch into
withdrawing it.

The office help--including the thirty vice-presidents--earned big
salaries largely because they boasted iron nerves and ulcer-resistant
stomachs. After their initiation into Da Vincelleo's extraordinary
humor, many of them became quite sedate about the embarrassing noises
and odors they seemingly made when they sat down on their chairs.

They even regarded with the classic calm of the clam's eye the
lightbulbs that exploded and flew apart, the mechanical mice, the
cockroaches that jumped out of opened drawers, and the water-faucets
that straightened out, and squirted them in the face. The few who
couldn't take it ceased drawing fabulous salaries, and retired to rest
homes.

As it was, none of these disturbing things interfered with Revanche's
progress. He didn't even pause on entering the Sanctum Sanctorum itself.




                                  II


Da Vincelleo was sitting behind a large desk with a Cellini-exquisite
reading lamp at his elbow. He was clad only in a pair of businessman's
electric-blue shorts, and a scarlet beret. His forehead was lofty
and square, a beautifully sculptured Greek temple dedicated to
Thought. But the face that hung beneath was a fox's, and the eyes were
twin furnaces, red-rimmed and smouldering. Sometimes beauty burned
phoenix-like in them--more often, dollar bills.

Da Vincelleo barely had time to swing the tape-thrower back into its
cabinet. He had just finished reviewing a case history of Revanche's
life. His agents had done a superb job on Revanche. He knew more about
the great financier than that complex man himself, for included in the
report were the opinions of ten top-flight psychiatrists. Despite the
fact that each of the reports was contradictory, the master of Bioid
felt he had an excellent looksee into his rival's psyche.

The Messinan had painstakingly studied Revanche's psych index as a
child. He knew that the formative years counted most, for the child was
father to the man. Understanding what kind of youngster Revanche had
been gave him an advantage from the start.

Therefore, when the magnate bounced bristling into his office, he
remained seated, sure that he had the upper hand.

B. T. faced him for a moment without greeting him, giving him the
famous "once-over," the scanning that had made strong men shake. His
eyes were as hard as a Bioid's. His nose had been heavily powdered,
so that the tiny line which circled its tip would be concealed. The
cleavage betrayed the artificiality of the tip, which was made of
plastiskin.

Revanche let his eyes crawl up and down his host like measuring
worms. Then, abruptly, frankly, he came to the point of his visit.
His request, and the whirlwind fury with which he thrust it, shook Da
Vincelleo out of his sureness, brought him to his feet with a gasp.

"Di', man!" he muttered hoarsely. "What're you saying? That could only
mean...."

"Da Vincelleo!" barked Revanche. "Da Vincelleo's genius in its full
flowering!" He coughed the words out of the side of his mouth, without
removing his cigar.

"My agents report you're hard as eternalloy," he went on, without
giving the other a chance to reply. "They say you have the artistic
genius of a Buonarotti, the ruthless ambition of a Borgia, and the
depraved humor of a Caligula!"

The Messinan did not flinch. He looked pleased, as well he might, for
Revanche meant the epithets as compliments.

"You'll stop at nothing to get what you want," the financier
emphasized. "It was your remorseless drive and executive ability that
made you build Bioid with only a servoshoeshiner as a start. And you
know as well as I do that you stole the money to buy the servo from
your blind and penniless mother!"

Da Vincelleo blinked. He had thought no one had known about that. But
after all, what did he care? His mother had been paid back. He had
buried her in a beautifully designed gold coffin.

"My psychologists say one of your ambitions is to become the richest,
most powerful man in the System. Unfortunately, I'm in your way. Well,
if you'll do as I ask I'm prepared to turn over my entire holdings to
you!"

Da Vincelleo's rusty-brown eyes flaked with red desire. "How could
I?" he countered. "If I tried it, I'd have to get out of the System.
Every free city, every planet would band together to attack me. The
universe would howl for my blood. What's wrong with you, Revanche, that
you can't see that? Are you seriously trying to get me killed--or is
it your contempt for the creative intellect which prevents you from
realizing how the dogs would howl?"

"Let them howl!" Revanche countered. "I'll sign over my entire fortune
to you. I'll make you president and owner of my company. We'll draw
up a contract which will make me head of Bioid. That way, I'll bear
all the responsibility. All, do you hear? You'll actually be directing
operations, but you'll be legally blameless. Do you understand?
Immediately after the job is finished, Bioid reverts to you."

"And you, Revanche. What are _you_ going to do?"

"As soon as my revenge is satisfied, I'll take my yacht to the
newly-discovered planet of Alpha Draconis. I'll be beyond extradition
there. I'll start business all over again. It's a raw planet that
offers a challenge to me this tame System has lost."

"Well, I don't know. I'll need time to think."

Revanche growled, then barked: "My agents say you're famous for making
electronicfast decisions. Tell me right now--or I go to your competitor.

"Think, man," he went on quickly. "You're an engineer, and an
artist. It will be the culmination, the masterpiece of your career.
Historically speaking, Buonarotti or Nero won't be able to hold a
candle to you. And you'll also be the richest man under the sun."

Da Vincelleo's eyes swiveled back and forth. Revanche could see the
tubes glowing, the switches clickclacking on the tremendous grey board,
inside that Greek temple of a forehead. But, he reflected, somewhat
hypocritically, it was a temple that needed a whip to drive out the
moneychangers.

The Messinan made up his mind suddenly. "Done! I'll get my lawyers, and
we'll make the transfer at once. I'll conduct operations sub rosa.
That's best."

He sat down at his desk, and ran his fingers over several electronic
"eyes" and said, "Your hometown is a free city, isn't it?"

"Yes, it has no contracts with the other cities. No alliances. It's
a non-co-op all the way. It exists by its smug self-righteous little
self!"

"And it refuses to use modern-day mechanisms. Right?"

"Yes. It has reverted back to the horse-and-buggy days. Claims
machines take the soul out of a man. Yet, and get this--here's
the irony of their set-up. Despising machinery, they're still run
by the most mechanical religion, and the most mechanical state,
politically-speaking, imaginable. They think the devil invented the
steam engine!

"Yet each soul in Dafess City is destined from birth to a certain rank
in society. Destined to a certain job, a certain mate, and a certain
place in Heaven! They've got a book which they call the Celestial
Blueprint. It outlines the future in veiled, allegorical terms. But the
Dafesses take every word literally, the letter being their spirit."

"Dafesses?" asked the artist, pretending ignorance.

"After Multum Bonum Dafess, founder and prophet. Anyway, the Blueprint
foretells the end of the world, when the inhabitants of Dafess will
be saved, and the rest of the world will go to a nice little place
reserved for them, called Rejectus.

"Rejectus is furnished with all the comforts of home--with hot water,
baked meats, specially-built furniture, highly-trained personal
attendants. You get me. Only the Dafesses, the Truncated, will be
left untouched after the Day of Judgment. The Untruncated will go to
Rejectus."

Da Vincelleo shifted uncomfortably in his chair. When he was a boy,
his loving mother had described just such a place as his ultimate
destination--if he didn't mend his ways. And, though he had scoffed,
his unconscious knew how to pitchfork certain obscure uncalloused
figments into his conscious mind.

"You really hate them, don't you?" he gibed.

"I hate them because they're so hateful," Revanche replied. "You would,
too, if you were destined to be looked down on all your life by people
you knew were stupid. Or if you fell in love, and you were forbidden to
marry because the girl wasn't slated by the Elders to be your mate. Or
if you were forced to marry some fat cow with the brains of a magpie
because the Elders interpreted a certain passage in the Blueprint as
referring to you."

His voice grew strained. "That's not all! When I ran away, and made my
pile, and could have any woman I wanted, I found I couldn't endure any
woman not from my hometown. Do you want to know why?" He touched his
artificial nosetip, his voice soaring in a new scream.

"I'll tell you why! From infanthood I was drilled in the idea that
only women with truncated noses were pure, glorious and beautiful.
Until I ran away, I never saw a woman with a normal nose. Never! And
now, even though I've disguised the mark of my native community, and
know, rationally, that untruncated women _are_ beautiful, my nerves, my
stomach, won't admit it. I think Miss Solar System of 2052 is ugly!

"I could have her anytime, anywhere, understand? But I can't endure
her, or any of her sisters. They all look misshapen. And you know what,
Da Vincelleo? Despite all my money, I can't get a single beautiful
woman in the System to cut off the tip of her nose for me. Not one! And
I've met plenty who've said they loved me, and would die for me. But
they don't love me enough to snip off the tips of their money-sniffing
little noses. Oh, no!"

For an instant there was mute agony in his stare. "Just why do you
think I've fought my way up until I'm sitting on top of Sol? So I can
take it easy, and play golf or go staryachting? Not B. T. Revanche!

"It's because I hate the guts of every soul in Dafess, every beakcut
heaven-elected who won't touch a machine because it might spot him
with unholy oil, yet is himself a machine of the lowest type! I'm going
to give them the most ironic justification of their creed.

"Funny thing, though," Revanche added, as if it were still puzzling
him. "A _statue_ of a beautiful woman without a truncated nose does
seem to stir me a little. Like that one in the slogan corridor. It
shows my basic instincts are still biologically normal."

Da Vincelleo sighed in mock sympathy and began running his fingers
over the "eyes" that would summon the chiefs of his staffs. He knew
that what he had in mind was going to be his masterwork. The secret
excavation beneath Dafess would in itself tax his resources. As he
blocked in the calls, his gaze fell upon a romantic historical novel on
the desk before him, _Renfrew Rides Again For The Mounted_.

His rocketing brain must have collided with a humorous thought, for his
foxlike lips turned up even more. So Revanche wanted irony, did he? And
poetic justice?

He looked at the financier but Revanche failed to notice the smile. He
was still raving.




                                  III


A month later, the noonday sun above Dafess City began dimming. In less
than five minutes it became a completely black ball, and remained that
somber, and terrifying unnatural hue until it sank below the horizon.

In due course the stars rose in their appointed courses. Then suddenly,
without warning, many fell, hurtling across the sky, and disappearing
into the bottomless throat of space.

The full moon bounded up. Just as it cleared the horizon, it was struck
by a large red star. Wounded, the moon dripped blood.

All these signs were accompanied, outwardly, at least, by great
rejoicing in Dafess. The Celestial Blueprint was fulfilling itself. The
Time had come. The Truncated were about to get their just reward.

They took purification baths for the first time in their lives. They
put on immaculate white robes. Then, en masse, they marched to the
great open square in the center of the city, and waited.

Meanwhile, all the Untruncated dwelling in Dafess had been cast out,
and all intercourse with the outside had been cut off. Inasmuch as they
used no radios, they had only to close the gates of their high-walled
city to become incommunicado.

As soon as that was done, and the citizens were collected together to
receive their long prophesied payment for holiness, they turned their
short snouts upward to await further developments. Nor were they at
all disappointed.

As predicted, the sky rolled up like a scroll. It did so with enough
thunder to shake the bones and rattle the teeth of even the most
hardened, and secretly sceptical.

With the thunder came a blaze of light which revealed a Titanic forge,
a cosmic smithy where brawny angels with soot blackening their robes,
and smudging their halos stood beating plowshares into swords and
spears.

Flame leaped. Bellows pumped by a cherubic host wheezed like asthmatic
Prometheuses. Hammers as large as hills clanged on white-hot
weaponheads the size of skyscrapers held on anvils large as mountains.
Fire and smoke puffed out in a great cloud that threatened to envelop
the city, and a clamor beat upon their ears, and bounced from the
heavens to the ground and back again.

Then, the sky snapped shut. It clicked like a camera-eye, and the
tremendous vision was gone.

But the assembled Truncated were transported with joy. Had they not
seen the swords prepared for the smiting of the heathen? All as
foretold by the Celestial Blueprint?

An exultant buzz rose from the crowd. It was, however, stilled at once,
for, across the blackened sky, lightning flashed, and twisted itself
into words that seared the eyes of the multitude. Everyone, watched
spellbound above them.

                         YOU HAVE BEEN CHOSEN.

A vast murmur of pleasure ascended from the crowd. Many of them, it
might have been noticed, looked relieved. They wiped sweat off their
brows, and glanced furtively at their companions to see if they had
noticed the doubt on their faces.

The Elders of the Truncated, gathered upon a raised platform in the
center of the square, lifted their arms and began the ritual whose
words would start the gears of the final minutes of the Day into
spinning.

As Blueprinted, the sky paled and became its normal afternoon azure.
The citizens stood hushed, gazing expectantly upwards. After a tense
two minutes, the sky suddenly turned black again. This time, however,
streaks of blue appeared between the black clots. In a moment, it was
seen that the sable hue had been caused by a host of figures, so many
they had almost blotted out the blue.

It was as if the sky were an upside-down sea out of which dived a
thousand bodies, plunging earthward head foremost.

A shout of rapture swelled from the ground to meet them. The dead
Truncated were descending from Heaven to crown the faithful living!

But there was one man who did not scream with joy. He was B. T.
Revanche, clad in a white robe and showing a nose from which the
plastiflesh had been removed. He was there because he had insisted to
Da Vincelleo that he could not get his money's worth unless he actually
participated.

"You can't taste blood over a TV set," he had growled.

So it was that he was the only one of the throng who did not at the
next moment fall silent in an amazed numbness. For the falling figures
did not carry laurels with which to crown the faithful on the ground.
Far from it. They held swords before them--long and broad two-edged
blades that flashed ominously in the bright sunlight.

A scream of mingled outrage and terror tore the air into tatters.
Something was wrong! Somebody had thrown a monkey wrench into the
celestial gears! The Blueprint had said nothing about this!

The figures swelled in size as they came closer. They slowed their
headlong rush, uprighted themselves, and floated feet first to earth.
There they paused a minute, glaring about, until the entire army had
descended.

The multitude looked at the swordsmen, who were close enough to be
discerned in detail. They breathed out one marveling and shocked
syllable: "X!"

Yes, each one of the thousands of descended beings was a replica of
X, the entity known in other lands and other tongues by a thousand
other names. X was one of his signs, and it was the one chosen by
the prophet Dafess to designate the entity because X was an unknown
quantity to the pagans.

It was X, so wrote the prophet, who had visited Dafess in person and
assured that man of wisdom that he alone was being given the monopoly
of the sacred teachings. Nor did it matter to the prophet that hundreds
of others had made prior claims. He, Dafess, was sure that only his
descendants were to be X's heirs on earth until such time as the entity
returned.

To prove it, they had marched into the wilderness and built this city,
and had then written a thousand books to bolster the tradition.

"I will carry a sword," X had promised.

The Dafesses believed this, but they had been assured by their Elders,
who were skilled in reading between the lines, that the sword would be
for the Untruncated. The peace would be the Truncateds'.

Now X, as foretold, had returned to their city. He brought a sword,
and if he also carried peace with him, it was a peace that passed
understanding. And his name, in this place and time, had suddenly
become Legion.

Each one of the horde was X, but such an X as had never been dreamed
of. He was eight feet tall, and made of eternalloy over which
plastiskin had been stretched to simulate flesh. So clever was the
craftsmanship that only one who knew beforehand, like Revanche, that
the creature was begotten in the factory could have told that here was
not a living X.

The artistry extended to the magnificent body, which had broad
shoulders that tapered to slim hips and long, panther-muscled legs. The
delicate feet were shod in brass, as the gods of old Egypt were reputed
to be shod.




                                  IV


Revanche, who was seeing for the first time the Messinan's work,
scrutinized with cynical elation the creature who had landed closest
to him. Awed despite himself, he saw that a fast-whirling halo hovered
perhaps a foot above the noble head. Every five seconds the luminous
ring changed color.

Even as he watched it, it changed color. From gold it dissolved into a
bloody red, and then into a gangrenous green. Next it became a bruise
purple, a witching hour black and finally shifted back to gold.

The aspect that startled Revanche most, however, was the face. The
false flesh-mask stretched over the metal skull was a grotesque
representation of the features of X as seen in the paintings of the
Spanish and Italian masters.

There was the somewhat narrow and bearded face with the "sensitive"
full-lipped mouth and the gentle nose that poised between straightness
and aquilinity. There were the same eyes--flowing and compassionate.

But on the mask those conventional features had been slightly altered,
or, as it were, "pulled." Though the lips had been cast with meekness
and love on their curves, the smile had been lengthened, and subtly
twisted until it had passed over the boundary of a smile and became a
snarl.

Whatever fearsome hand had fashioned that mask had known that a snarl
is an elongated smile, just as a smile is a modified snarl. The
hand had perceived that it was the snarl of the ape that had become
the smile of the man, perceived too that, the process of evolution
continuing, the smile of the man had passed into the ultra-tender
mouth-curving of X.

And now, that smile which was the apex of Nature's efforts, had been
remolded, recast, rehammered, and returned into a caricature of itself.

Da Vincelleo was not only a scientist, he was an artist supreme. In
that mask he had shown the people of Dafess a reflection of themselves.
And he made them see what they had done to X, how they had twisted
the face of universal love into an inverted image of their true
nature--that of self-love.

The mask was the face of X--_reductio ad absurdum_.

The gentle curve of nostrils had been expanded into derision, and an
almost savage fierceness. The glowing compassion of the eyes had become
intense with a flame so hot it made the onlookers wonder how the lashes
and brows resisted melting, and running into the cavernous eyesockets.

Yet, though fiery, the lineaments combined into a chilling sight. And
as there were thousands of the masks, they contributed to a geometrical
progression of terror.

Revanche, though he was safe, felt struck with fear and guilt that had
been instilled into him when he was a child.

At that moment an Elder who had been eyeing the nearest X, afraid to go
into the ritualistic embrace with it because of its fearsome aspect,
suddenly ran to it. He threw himself at its feet, clasped its legs, and
howled: "Mercy!"

A deep powerful voice that sounded more like the roar of a motor than
anything else answered, "Justice!"

Justice was what the Elder had prayed for all of his life. Now he got
it.

The automaton lifted the sword, and brought it down with great violence
on the Elder's chicken-skinny neck.

"Chuck!" rasped the blade.

"Bump!" replied the head.

The white-bearded ball rolled on the pavement until it stopped against
the curb. Upside down, it looked at everything from a new and possibly
revelatory viewpoint, for its expression was not only bewildered and
hurt but, for the first time, educated.

Dafess City became bedlam, pandemonium, terror on a cataclysmic scale.
The white body of the Truncated broke into fifty thousand fragments
that fled here and there, circled, whirled, zig-zagged, leaped,
crawled, bounded, darted, and lunged.

The legion of X stalked after them. They moved jerkily but swiftly.
Above all, they moved relentlessly.

When a cornered person could not get by the awesome figure, he or she
would go down on his or her knees and clasp his hands and howl, "Mercy!
Mercy!"

"Justice!" roared the immobile lips of the mask.

"Slush!" smacked the lips of the blade.

"Thud!" echoed the head.

Though many skulls rolled, a more or less objective observer, such as
Revanche, would have noticed that many more were spared.

They were unharmed for a reason, however, for always the flailing
swords forced the mob in a general direction.

They were being herded towards the Temple of the Righteous, a truncated
pyramid not far off the square and one which also housed the First
Dafess Sacred-Secular Bank and Finance Corporation. Peculiarly enough,
the latter institution had grown to such proportions that it had
crowded out the former and now occupied the center of the building. The
Dafesses had accepted what seemed to them to be the will of X and had
moved the holy section to one corner.

Through the huge marble doors the multitude was forced. They had no
place else to go, for, wherever they turned, the blazing eye and the
flashing sword headed them off.

B. T. Revanche allowed himself to be borne along with the current. Once
inside the pyramid, however, he separated himself from the crowd, and
ran down a side-passage. The main body was being forced into the open
door of the vault. He did not wish to go with them. He had persuaded Da
Vincelleo to prepare a private entrance for him.

He ran with all the speed his short legs could muster, puffing hard.
When he rounded a corner, he stopped short. His heart, which had been
pounding only moderately now suddenly went into the Walpurgisnacht
terror music of Moussorgsky's _Night on Bare Mountain_. A Bioid X was
stationed down the hall, exactly in front of the mural that concealed
the secret door!

He paused, sucked in oxygen and courage, and then walked briskly up to
the thing, confident that the electronic "interferer" he wore strapped
to his belt would neutralize it.

But when he got up to it his suppressed doubt and suspicion were
translated into action. The flame-eyed X lifted its sword, and lashed
out at him.

"You have been chosen!" the frozen lips roared.

The keen tip missed by a spiderweb taking Revanche's Adam's apple out
in one neat chunk.

Appalled, the financier turned and fled.

While he ran, he turned his head and shrilled back, "You are making a
mistake!" It was a futile thing to scream out, for the plastiskin ears
were deaf to meaning, if not to noise.

Revanche's hand fumbled on the interferer's switch, and clicked it back
and forth. It seemed to be working; it was warm and humming. What then
was the matter?

He cursed Da Vincelleo for a strictly third-rate artisan--a bungler,
botcher, and bonehead.

Suddenly he was running down another empty corridor, his hard soles
bouncing echoes off the faraway walls. _Slap! Slap! Puff! Wheeze!_
There was an open window at the distant end of the hall. If only he
could make that...!

Again he stopped short. Half hidden in the shadows stood an X on
guard. It turned its head, and tiger-bright eyes flamed.

Revanche choked off a scream, and whirled. He expected to see the other
destroyer behind him, but it was not in sight. When he reached the
junction of the two corridors, he saw it standing there, sword held out
before it in satiric salute.

There was but one way for Revanche to go--straight back to the bank's
vault.

For the first time he realized that he himself, B. T. Revanche, was
being herded!

He spun around again to face the oncoming terrors. Frantically, his
fingers flicked the switch.

"Stop! Stop! I am your master! I am Revanche! I own you!"

"You are the chosen!" they bellowed.

He whirled, and began running again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he reached the vault, he found the X's lined up in a double row,
like the guards at a royal reception. They stood facing each other with
eyes blazing at eyes, swords held straight out before them and legs
widespread above gleaming shoes of brass.

Revanche did not stop but sped down between the guard of honor as if
he were afraid they would all begin chopping at once. He had a vision
of tiny fragments of meat swimming in a pool of blood, like protozoa
jerking in a drop of water beneath a microscope.

When he came to the huge steel door of the vault, he stopped and looked
within. The floor immediately before him had raised up to form a wall.
Beneath it was a round hole that acted as the entrance to a large,
metallic, and greasy tube.

Down that funnel had slid the entire population, screaming, wailing,
weeping, clutching at one another for support, striking out in a burst
of maniacal fury.

Down they had gone notwithstanding, with a gnashing of teeth and
tongues, and frantic clawings at the smooth and slippery sides in a
desperate attempt to keep from hurtling to the doom they knew awaited
them.

How well they knew it! This tube was exactly that which had been
foretold in the Celestial Blueprint as the passageway for the heathen
when they fell headlong to Rejectus!

Revanche had planned to slip down his private stairway to the little
balcony that would overlook the other end of the tube. There he would
have watched the doomed spilling out in a white and frenzied flood.
There he would have lapped up revenge as a placated Greek ghost would
have lapped blood at a Trojan hecatomb.

Instead, trembling, and bursting with terror, he turned and faced the
X's. "You haven't got me yet!" he screamed at them.

He kicked the little wheel, that closed the vault from the inside. Once
the two-hundred-ton door clanged shut, it could not be opened as long
as the inside wheel remained locked in place. It was an anti-robbery
device that he was well aware of, having in his youth once planned to
plunder the bank in order to get a start in business.

The huge door swung shut swiftly.

Revanche shook his fist at the onrushing horde, then jerked around,
and leaped into the tube. The thunder of brass shoes filled the vault
walls. Just before he slid out of view Revanche twisted his head for
one last look.

A Bioid was leaping through the air in a desperate endeavor to
sacrifice itself by stopping the door with its hard and almost
indestructible eternalloy body.

The financier did not see whether or not the Bioid made it, for he
dropped abruptly into blackness.




                                   V


Normally, he would have shot down the smooth funnel, inclined at
thirty-five degrees, at a terrific speed. But he had not become the
most resourceful financier of the solar system for nothing. No wizard
in an emergency, he yet liked to be prepared.

So it was that he flicked the switch of the anti-grav unit around his
waist, and quickly slowed to a half-speed. He had wanted to wear a
full power machine, but it would have been too bulky to conceal beneath
the loose folds of his garments. He had to be content with a moderate
rate of descent.

After twenty seconds of sliding, he slipped out of the mouth of the
funnel. It was as he had hoped. His checked speed enabled him to drop
onto a granite ledge beneath the opening. Even so, he fell close to the
very edge. A little more velocity, and he would have gone completely
over.

Shuddering, he clutched the rim of rock until he'd regained some of his
composure. After a while, he inched forward until his head hung over
the lip of the precipice, and he could gaze downward into the abyss.

Below, seemingly a thousand feet down, though he knew the distance must
be an illusion fabricated by Da Vincelleo, was a lake of molten lava
rising in great billows, then sinking into deep valleys, and releasing
gigantic bubbles that rose and burst, and loosed a stench of sulfur
that almost suffocated him. Smoke spiralled up past his head, and
collected against the roof far above. The heat that ascended was strong
enough to crisp his face if he had looked long into it.

Nowhere was there a sign of Dafess's inhabitants. All had been
dissolved in the roaring sea of lava, in the hell that had been
prophesied for all their enemies.

Quailing, Revanche looked to left and right along the narrow ledge for
an avenue of escape. There was none. Both ends tapered off into the
rock.

Straight across, perhaps a hundred feet away, was the balcony from
which he had hoped to see the show. If he had the guts, he thought,
he could step up his anti-grav past the danger point and, almost
weightless for a second, could leap to the balcony.

If the pack didn't burn out while he was in midair. If he didn't
misgauge and miss the balcony ... if the hellish blast from below
didn't crisp him before he completed the jump ... if....

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood up, and by the glow thrown up from the bright ocean, he peered
up the slide. Another _if_. What if he could brace his legs against the
sides of the _O_, and painfully work his way back up?

At that moment a figure shot out of the shadows of the tunnel, a figure
that approached at express-train speed and quickly loomed larger and
larger. Its blood-colored halo, the mask with the snarl of tenderness,
the furnace-door eyes, and the dripping sword--all could be made out in
frightening detail.

Like the lost soul he believed he was, Revanche screamed and dropped
flat to the ledge, crushing his snipped nose into the granite. He
moaned, and waited for the clang of armor and the final whistle of the
blade through the air before it thudded into his neck.

Above him something dark and monstrous shot out of the _O_ and roared
by.

Whoosh!

It missed the ledge by many feet, and fell into the lava ocean.

A train of shadows flickered over Revanche. The air was disturbed by
the constant passage of flying elephantine bodies.

Whoosh!

Whoosh!

Whoosh!

One by one, like living shells exploded out of a circus cannon, they
projectiled over their intended prey. By the thousands they meteored
over him, eyeballs matching the glare of the lava below, swords
automatically slashing out even as they spun and turned over and over,
and splashed into the liquid rock.

Whish! Brrr! Whoosh! Splash!

Suddenly--silence.

Slowly, Revanche rose. He could not believe it. He looked over the
ledge. Only the bare and boiling sea. He turned and glanced up the
tube. Silence and shadows, and the gleaming greasy symbol for zero.

Understanding melted the glacier on his brain. He broke into a wild
dance, wept tears for gladness, whistled three times, and shouted,
"I've won! Revanche has won! And I've beat them!"

_Clippety-clop! Clippety-clop!_

The unbelievable ring of iron horseshoes jumped out of the tube's mouth.

Revanche froze in a pirouette, stood poised, then seemed to collapse
into a strange loose creature that shambled over to the funnel and
leaned backward to look up, like a dazed and stiffnecked Neanderthal.

The liquid film of joy glazed over his mind again, grew white and cold
and lumpy.

A mount and its rider were coming out of the darkness and into the
brimstone glare. The horse was a nightmare black, its eyeballs burning
tiger-yellow bright. It stretched back cruel and foaming lips, and
revealed teeth sharp enough to rend him.

A ghost horse, it cried for blood while its magnetic shoes clung
briefly to the metal floor before lifting again.

_Clippety-clop_ rang its hooves.

Then it stopped and hung its head down over the tube's lip and fixed
Revanche with one demon's eye while its rider dismounted. It remained
in that attitude, and did not move even when its master dropped gently
onto the ledge to face Revanche.

The financier felt his bulging eyes threaten to leave his head, like
balloons tugging at their moorings.

His eyes understood before his brain did.

They took in a face that was a compound of two persons, a masterly
paradox of features and traits: compassionate and merciless, sensitive
and coarse, loving and hating. It was a hybrid of X, and of _himself_.

It was not that contradictory face that told him so much, that
explained why his interferer had failed to work, even why he had been
"herded," and was now facing this fantastic and vengeful creation.

It was something else that told him that not only Dafess City but he,
Revanche, had been the victim of a Caligulan sense of humor, the butt
of the most colossal practical joke the Messinan had ever played.

That something else he had been too shocked to think about. Why had
the Bioids, who carried full-power anti-gravs within their bodies,
fallen over the ledge? It was because Da Vincelleo had deliberately
destroyed them to raise his hopes. And then had brought out this--this
thing--this _joke_! Not satisfied to make Revanche squirm, he had
wanted him to sweat blood.

The creature that was drawing a saber from its scabbard, was dressed in
a uniform now long dead, but easily recognizable because it had been
resurrected recently in many of the romantic historical novels that
enjoyed a Solarwide vogue.

It wore the rugged active-service boots, the dun-colored trousers, and
the stiff abbreviated jacket of a twentieth century foot soldier of
officer caste. It was singing softly from a rigid mouth.

"Death to the enemy."

It was plain whom the enemy was to be.

Revanche fell to his knees.

"Mercy!"

Its saber lifted. The immobile lips roared.

"Justice!"




                               EPILOGUE

Da Vincelleo, hovering far above Dafess in a spaceship, watched the
final scene upon the TV screen before him. Then, sighing because it
hurt him to destroy his greatest work of art, he pressed a red button.
And he saw the city of Dafess disappear in the old and familiar, but
still terrible, mushroom.

"That fool Revanche!" he said. "Did he really think I'd massacre an
entire city and take a million to one chance of escaping retribution
from the Solar Police?"

He did not think of his being punished for such a deed as being
justice. Anything he did was right; retaliation from others would have
been vengeance, not justice.

He sighed again. The Project: Dafess, had been enormous. But the worst
problem had been Dafess's citizens themselves. Even while an exact
replica of the city was being constructed in a Canadian wilderness,
far from the real Dafess, his staff was tackling the necessary
research, of which the hardest part had been both historical and
technological. One, finding out exactly what each citizen looked and
acted and talked like. Two, building Bioids that looked, acted, and
talked like the original.

Of course, the whole illusion had been designed to fool only one man
and had had to be kept in existence less than ten hours.

A minor, though fascinating problem had been that of getting blood
to spout from the severed heads and concealing the springs and wires
inside the wrecked bodies.

At that moment Revanche, very much alive in his star yacht poised just
above the stratosphere, pressed a button. The screen on his desk showed
him a blur that was the missile he'd just launched and the target, Da
Vincelleo's ship. Then there was incandescence, followed by the old
familiar mushroom.

Revanche growled, "That fool!" and he turned away from the screen. His
face was smug as a porcupine's that has loaded up on tender and vitamin
rich birch-bark. He felt exceedingly satisfied. Why not? Watching the
destruction of the synthetic citizens of the synthetic city of Dafess
had been almost as rewarding as seeing the real city delivered to
judgment. The process had been a type of psycho-drama that any good
psychiatrist would have recommended for emotional catharsis.

For the financier trusted no man, and though Da Vincelleo had thought
his double-crossing project was a secret, he could not hide it from the
richest and most inquisitive human in the system. Nor had he guessed
that Revanche would then employ Bioid's competitor to fashion an
electronic proxy of himself.

Revanche had suffered--long distance--as his plastiskin counterpart had
seemed to suffer. Its terror-stricken face was his, and when it had
yelled with frustration and screamed for mercy, he had done so also.

But when he saw the terrible parody of himself lop off his proxy's head
with a saber, he had felt as if he'd been killed and then come to life
again.

He'd been seized with a laughter that forced him to grip his chair to
keep from falling to the floor. And now, very much calmed and smoking a
new cigar, he felt wonderful about his mockup's death.

He no longer had a barely suppressed fear of being hurled by his deity
into the molten ocean of Rejectus. It was as if he had paid for his own
sins through the mechanical scapegoat and now could live on with an
untroubled conscience.

He took the cigar from his mouth and chortled.

And a third mushroom suddenly sprouted.

Revanche and his star yacht went back to the elements in its white
heart, far hotter than the flames of Rejectus.

Da Vincelleo had been a thorough man, as suspicious as Revanche
himself. Shortly after he had made his deal with the financier, he
had had a machine built which keyed in to the personal pattern of his
_kappa_ brain-waves. If that pattern disappeared, quit radiating, a
circuit was activated which sent a "bloodhound" missile soaring up
into the air from a buried pit in the city of Messina, a missile
whose electromagnetic nose sniffed for the scent of Revanche's _kappa_
brain-waves and would not stop until it homed in on its target.

Thus, if the financier had paused long enough to light up his cigar
_before_ pressing the button that disposed of his enemy, he would have
finished smoking it and many more after it.

For Da Vincelleo had been convinced that Revanche had perished with
the false city of Dafess, and he was just reaching out to flick the
bloodhound's de-activation stud when Revanche's missile interrupted him
forever.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CELESTIAL BLUEPRINT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


