The Project Gutenberg eBook of Salvage
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Salvage

Author: Roy Norton

Release date: March 24, 2024 [eBook #73244]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Street & Smith Corporation

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALVAGE ***





SALVAGE

By Roy Norton

Author of “Mr. Catlin’s Weakness,” “Widders Come First,” Etc.

    Captain Drake again proves, and this time most brilliantly,
    his right to the title: “The Opportunist.” With remarkable
    sagacity he scents an opportunity on the wind.


Piræus, that historical port of Greece, lay drenched and sweltering in
sunshine. Its great water front, whence galleys had sailed bravely forth
in ancient days, was packed with shipping, most of it idle; for trade
was in the doldrums. Docked between two big “smoke boats” lay the very
trim and neat steam schooner, _Malabart_, Captain Eli Drake, owner and
commander; and there was nothing in the _Malabart’s_ physical appearance
to indicate that she, too, was yawning for a cargo of any sort, or to
any port, though the charter rate might be so low as to barely pay
expenses. Captain Drake, whose sobriquet of “The Old Hyena” had survived
the days of sail, was ashore, harassed by cares.

He had been eating into capital to keep his ship in commission, and his
crew, which he had gathered in the course of many years, from being
disbanded. He prized his crew and, after his ship, they came first in
his affections. In quest of cargo--any cargo--he had scoured the port,
made daily trips over the short drive to Athens, and spent liberal sums
on cablegrams to many agents, without avail. He felt like cursing the
big steamship companies, which, with their army of organized runners,
were rapidly driving the independent owners and tramps off the seas.

In a mood of sullen obstinacy he had tramped almost the length of the
docks when, unexpectedly, he heard the clatter of a cargo winch; and the
sound was so unusual that, like a magnet, it drew him in its direction.
He found a rusty tramp that was lading.

“Now what--how did I miss getting that cargo?” he reflected. “The
Rhodialim, eh?” And after a moment’s thought he muttered: “Oh, yes.
Belongs to that firm of Hakim & Letin. Got her and one other schooner,
doing mostly Levantine and East African coast trade. Wish I could have
got that cargo. My luck’s out.”

Without thinking, or observing that at the dock gates there was a
watchman, who, at the moment, had his back turned and was in voluble
altercation with one of his countrymen, Captain Eli strolled inward. He
finally halted, and with hands in pockets stared, suddenly discovering
something else that made him curious.

“That’s blamed funny!” he thought. “Big cases marked ‘Mining machinery,’
but a couple of stevedores chuck ’em into the slings as if they were
empty. Also cases of merchandise put up like heavy prints that seem just
as light, and as---- Good Lord! Up there on the bridge! If that ain’t
Bill Morris, I’m dotty. So he’s got a ship out here, eh, after it got
too hot for him about everywhere else on salt water! Lost two ships in
the Pacific trade, under mighty suspicious circumstances, and had his
ticket taken away, last I heard of him. Ummh! Ten or twelve years ago,
that was. So he’s skipperin’ this craft, eh? If him and me hadn’t locked
spars two or three times, I’d go over and rile him up with a leetle
light, airy banter. I guess he’s----”

“Hey you! Got any business here? How’d you get past me at the gate?” a
voice disturbed him. And although the fellow spoke bastard Greek, Drake,
who, with a sailor’s facility, had picked up considerable of the tongue,
understood, and turned to see the watchman glowering at him.

“Why?” he asked. “Can’t anybody come onto your dock? Nothing secret
about it, is there?”

The watchman sputtered something about none without a pass from Hakim &
Letin being allowed in, and somewhat peremptorily ordered Drake to clear
out. Not being accustomed to such treatment, disgruntled, affronted, but
recognizing the weakness of his position and the futility of retort,
Drake turned and, swearing under his breath, obeyed.

It is possible that the episode might have passed from his mind
entirely, but for an encounter that followed some hours later, when,
just as he was turning toward the _Malabart_, a man whose face bore the
almost indelible stamp of the engine rooms of ships, with grease worked
deeply into the pores of the skin, respectfully touched his cap peak and
accosted him in fairly good, though accented, English.

“Captain Drake,” he said. “Excuse me, sir, for stopping you, but I am a
good man out of work, and want a job on your ship, sir.”

“Sorry, my man, but we’re full up,” Captain Eli replied. “Too full,” he
added, and would have proceeded on his way, had not the applicant
insisted.

“I am good man, sir. First-class engineer; but I would take anything in
your engine room. Because me, I have big family, and ships are all full
now, it seems to me, sir. I lose job when not my fault. Not at all. When
I took engines of ship Rhodialim anybody tell you they scrap heap. I
make ’em good. And now, without word, since that Captain Bill Morris
come, I am fired. He say have his own engineer and----”

“Huh? What’s that?” Captain Eli, who had been slowly moving forward with
the insistent one at his side, stopped and stared at the man. “Do you
happen to know the name of the new engineer?”

“It is Simmons, or Simons, or something like that.”

Drake’s mouth pursed itself as if to whistle an exclamation, and for a
moment he stood absent-mindedly staring at the stones beneath his feet.
But his thought ran: “Simmons! Simmons! That was the engineer of the
ship that Bill lost last, and he was one of the chief witnesses at the
insurance investigation. Something funny about this business!”

He abruptly started away, saying as he did so: “You come on board with
me, and I’ll learn if there’s anything can be done. Let me see your
ticket.” And then, a moment later: “Beltramo--Giuseppe Beltramo is your
name, eh? And your ticket shows a long, clean record. No wonder they
didn’t want you on that boat. Never mind the questions, now. I’ll ask
all the questions myself.”

As a rule the relations between Captain Eli Drake and his chief mate,
William Catlin, were of two separate characters, inasmuch as afloat they
observed the distinctions in station and Drake brooked no interference;
but it was well known that ashore they were more intimate than brothers
usually are, and confidants in nearly everything. Hence, when the
commander sent for Catlin upon his arrival aboard, and on his entry into
the cabin addressed him as “Bill,” Catlin thought: “Something’s turned
up.” Aloud he said:

“Landed something, skipper?”

“Landed enough to set me to a heap of thinking, Bill,” Drake said. And
then he bent forward and in a confidential tone told of his experiences,
ending with: “It seems to me there’s some sort of a job being put up by
Hakim & Letin; and--well, there might be some way for us to make
something out of it.”

“Sort of an opportunity, eh?” Catlin grinned, remembering that the Cape
Cod man had earned the reputation of being an opportunist. “Maybe you
can see one, but I can’t. Don’t mind my thick-headedness. I can get
anything when it’s explained, all right.”

But Drake seemed to have become absorbed in some thought of his own. He
stared absently through the cloud of pipe smoke; and finally chuckled,
as if he had reached a solution of some problem.

“I think I sort of grab an idea,” he said at last, getting to his feet.
“You’re a hell of a good friend, Bill, but as a helper in working out a
puzzle you don’t amount to much. Never mind. Think I got it, myself. So
just talking it over with you did have some use, after all. You go down
and keep that feller I brought aboard interested, while I slip below and
see the chief. Most likely be in his cabin, I expect.”

They went out together and Drake sought the engineer.

“Forbes,” he said to that gray-haired veteran. “Can you find something
for an engineer out of a job to do for a few days?”

“Can’t find enough to do myself, let alone make work for a new man. If
this keeps up---- Hold on. While I think of it, that chap Flint, my
third, asked me to-day if I thought there was a chance for him in the
navy. Now if he got a month off to go to the nearest place he could pass
his examinations and file his application----”

“The sure-enough right thing! Let him take a month, and put this feller
on until Flint comes back. Come on up topside and talk to him.”

The result of the conversation was that two men, at least, were made
happy that evening--Flint, who had got unexpected leave for a month, and
Beltramo, who had got a temporary billet.

But Drake was not on the ship when the shift was made. In the roughest
suit of clothes he could muster he had gone ashore and made his way to a
not too-clean bar, where he knew that pilots were wont to gather. There
he patiently waited for the arrival of one he knew. The man came at
last, and Captain Eli drew him into a little private room at the rear.

“Christophe,” Captain Eli said, “I have done you a favor once or twice,
and you’re the kind of man that likes to repay. Well, the time has come
when you may be of use. Now first, you’ve got to keep your mouth
shut--not one word--not one word to anybody, not even your wife, of what
we say here in this room.”

The pilot, whose face was seamed with years and sea service, promptly
lifted his hand and swore an oath that would have satisfied any band of
conspirators that ever existed.

“First, you know this sea as well as any one, I take it?”

“By Heaven! Better than all save one or two. Was I not a fisherman in
these waters when old enough to float? I know every foot of it and every
reef, and every island and----”

“Good!” Captain Eli interrupted. He leaned across the little table
between them and lowered his voice. “Christophe, if you were going to
sink a ship that was supposed to be bound eastward--say for Jaffa--where
would you do it?”

For a moment the pilot’s mouth hung open and his eyes were wide, as if
he feared for Drake’s sanity.

“But, sir, captain--you--you are not going to sink---- You don’t mean
that----”

“No, of course not! I sink nothing. But you think it over carefully and
answer my questions,” Drake continued. And the pilot, still wondering,
slowly lowered his eyes, shut them as if to ponder such a case, and then
asked: “What time of year, captain?”

“This time of year,” Drake replied.

And again the weather-beaten old pilot shut his eyes and thought.

“Listen, sir,” he said in his quaint but adequate English. “Many things
one must think of. If mens want to sink ship, but not drown anybody,
they must be not too far from land for open boat, eh? Must be some place
where not too much danger big seas for small boats, eh? Must also be
some place where nobody see--away from fishermen’s boats, or cargo
boats, or bigger ships--some place lonely this time year. Plenty places
man could scuttle ship, but few where get all these things what want,
eh? Well, about now most fishin’ boats work”--he got up and walked to a
rough map that was tacked on the wall and that was almost solidly
smeared with the trails of many fingers across its surface--“works up
about here mostly. In some months, here; some months, there; but now,
about here. So no good up there.” His finger moved as he talked. “No
good through here, because big ships go there. No good there, because
small ships what do island trade work in and out. So, here best place
for all things. Almost only place which fit all I speak between here and
Island of Rhodes. Not too far out of the way. Very good place. Deep
water--plenty water and not much chance boat ever drift when hit bottom.
Yes, captain, sir, that best place anybody can think of--right about
there.”

His gnarled finger ceased to move--pointed at open water off Nauplia.

They sat down again and, while Christophe eyed him with perplexed looks,
the captain reflected.

“That, you think, is a place a man who knew these waters well would
select?” he said. “But a man who didn’t know them?”

“God knows where!” the pilot exclaimed, lifting his hands and letting
them fall to the table again. “It is the place--the place I say--where
one who knew would choose in, say--seven times out of ten. As you, sir,
know, there are some thousands of islands.”

For half an hour Drake continued to catechize, but without stirring the
old pilot from his conclusions.

“Well, Christophe,” he said at last, arising to go, “I’m going to hire
you for a cruise that may never take place; but I’m taking a little
gamble on certain things. You begin work to-morrow, always with your
mouth shut. Here’s what you are to find out: First, when the Rhodialim
sails. Second, if she’s taking a pilot aboard, and if so, who and what
he is. And third, you’re to report to me aboard the _Malabart_ each
evening just after dark. I don’t care to have too many notice that you
come there. Is it understood? Going wages, of course,” he concluded,
with Yankee thrift.

“Yes, sir, captain. Very well I understood it, and do what you ask.
Maybe some time you tell me why all this, eh?”

“Maybe,” said Drake laconically, as he thumped upon the table to pay for
his bill. And he left behind him one who was still wondering a little if
a certain Captain Drake was all there.

Catlin had a surprise on the following morning, when told that they were
going to take on some supplies. And he was still more astonished when
Drake asked him to muster the crew and learn whether there was any man
aboard who had ever had any experience in diving. Catlin found a stoker
who admitted that years before he had worked for a salvage company.
Drake told the man to get on shore-going clothes and come with him, and
the twain disappeared. The man returned that afternoon accompanied by a
truck, which duly unloaded and brought aboard a collection of stuff that
made even Catlin scratch his head, and caused conjectures for’ard as to
whether The Old Hyena was going into the wrecking business. It consisted
of a complete diving outfit--air pumps and all--as well as huge
collision mats and handling gear. Drake did not appear until evening,
and seemed unusually speechless, and he dined and waited for Christophe.

The latter came at last, grinning with self-satisfaction, and was at
once closeted with Drake, who asked: “Well, what did you learn?”

“That Rhodialim, she sail day after to-morrow. She got most her cargo
aboard now. But it’s funny, captain, sir, she got one man who knew this
sea same as me. Long time ago he fisherman, then go away, and been down
Smyrna where not got too good name. Good man, when sober, but too much
drink, so never get good job. That man I see in saloon. He most full
and---- You owe me thirty drachmas, I spend on him get him fuller, so he
talk. Bymeby he borrow fifty drachmas from me, which also you owes me.
He brag some and say pretty soon he pay back. Pretty soon, maybe two
weeks, he come back with plenty money in pockets. But he shut up like
oyster when I ask how make this so much money, and he say nobody but him
ever goin’ know that. Now what you wish me make?”

“You go home and keep on keeping your mouth shut. Come aboard at noon
to-morrow. We sail to-morrow afternoon.” Drake was suddenly decided in
his movements.

“How long be gone from my old woman?” Christophe asked.

“Can’t tell. Maybe one week, maybe two. Not likely to be longer, I
think. But all you’ve got to do is to come aboard and I’ll tell you then
where we’re bound. I’m going to clear for Smyrna. There will be no
secret about that.”

On the following morning when Captain Eli went ashore he took with him
the chief engineer. The latter returned with two big machine cases and
armored, high-pressure hose, together with a case of fittings. Late that
afternoon the _Malabart_ slipped out and away, so palpably light that
other sea captains who observed her shook their heads with
understanding. A ship putting to sea in ballast in dull times evokes the
sympathy of the seawise. Aboard the _Malabart_ there was an air of gloom
among the crew.

The captain and owner, walking the bridge, said to Catlin:

“Well, Bill, I’m taking a gamble--thousand to one shot, that’s all.”

When dusk fell the island of Thermia lay close in to starboard, and the
man at the wheel stood ready to port his helm and bring her over from
the sou’-east-by-east to an easterly course to round the island, that
being the route toward Smyrna; but old Christophe, standing behind him,
took the wheel, rang for slow speed and groped in toward the island. It
loomed up about them, a rocky point, before he said over his shoulder to
Captain Eli:

“Here’s where we can lay to, sir. Good anchorage here in this cove, and
no risk of wind.”

All that night she rocked there, gently; on a sea that was almost
without a swell. And when morning came, to the crew’s further curiosity,
she brought in her hook, swung about, and headed due west, plodding
along at slow speed and apparently purposeless. A liner came out of the
north and gave her a passing hoot. Christophe, eyeing the other boat,
said to Captain Eli:

“She be for Messina way, and now not likely be another ship along here
for ten days. That’s what those mens know. If I make good guess, that’s
why they clear Pirzeus to-day, after big ship go, sir.”

“And when will we make that Island of Hydra?” Drake asked, staring to
the westward.

“Just about sunset, captain, sir. Then we slip round it and there are
small islands between it and mainland, and entrance into Nauplia which
so long and so big it is like long gulf. We lay behind them islands,
sir, and--see what shall see about midnight, I think, sir.”

Drake caught his dry, knowing grin, but did not entirely share his
confidence as to the outcome of their strange voyage.

The pilot’s prediction as to progress was fulfilled; just as a hazy
sunset colored the tips of the high, bleak mountains behind which the
day disappeared, they passed the isle with its abandoned and obsolete
fortifications, and hove to in waters that seemed to have been deserted
since the time of ancient wars. Night fell with a thin, low-lying fog
that seemed to sweep down from the great bastions of Nauplia and rest on
the still waters. The stars were obscured and a new depression engulfed
Drake.

“The weather’s against us,” he said gloomily, to the storm-beaten old
pilot. “They could pass us at a couple of cable lengths and we’d never
know it.”

“Not if we were out in a small boat, listening,” Christophe said. “In
small boat hear everything. On ship, no--not so quite well. We must put
out boat and get out maybe two three miles and wait. Yes, maybe fog too
bad, one way, but very good, other. When they pass we get course then
slip quiet, very quiet, same way, with _Malabart_, eh?”

Drake pondered. There seemed no other method. He cursed the fog, but
ordered a boat away with Catlin and the pilot aboard, the latter
assuring him that he could find his way back to the ship if the night
were as black as the pits of Satan. A long wait followed after the boat
had disappeared. The gloom of the darkened _Malabart_, the lack of the
bell striking the hour, the absolute stillness of the ship, were all
upsetting. The very lifelessness of the protected water where she lay
was annoying, for there was not the slightest lapping whisper of a wave
against her hull. Down in the engine room even the stokers who kept up
steam had been cautioned against the clanging of a furnace door or the
ring of a shovel. Had one passed the _Malabart_ within ten yards he
might have thought her the ghost of some long-abandoned ship. Drake
listened from the outer wing of the bridge, bending over, sometimes with
a hand cupped to his ear, until he was tired. He had about decided that
his voyage and expenditure had been born of folly, when he heard a faint
creak, followed a minute later by another. Then Catlin’s voice below
hailed softly, and the boat pulled around to the side ladder, which had
been lowered and swung barely above the water.

“All right, sir. She passed so close that she almost ran us down. She
had doused her lights and was not doing more than five or six knots.
Christophe says there could be no mistake. She was the Rhodialim, all
right.”

The pilot joined in with: “About a mile and a half out. Long row back.”

“It won’t do for us to follow too closely on their heels, anyway,”
Captain Eli said. “But are you certain that you can pick her up again,
Christophe, in all this murk?”

“I know the course she will take. I think so, with luck,” the pilot
said. “They not alter course again. Too much else business think of, I
expect. Just keep straight on about five, six miles; then stop. They not
want go much farther. Might meet small fishin’ boats out of Nauplia. Not
take chance of that, eh?”

Captain Eli stood blockily, a dim figure in the darkness, and seemed
making mental calculations.

“I don’t think we’d best be in too much of a hurry,” he said at last.
“We’ve got to take the chances of being too late. If the crew are in on
it with the commander, mate and engineer, there’ll be no time wasted. If
they’re not, the boats won’t be ready to lower, and besides he’ll have
to put up a bluff at saving the ship, to fool the crew. We’d best give
them at least an hour and a half.”

“That crew, captain, sir, are the scum of the water front,” Christophe
put in.

“But just the same, we don’t know that they’re in on it,” Drake replied.
“Bill Morris don’t like to cut too many in on his crooked work. Seems to
me more likely that he’ll try to stampede ’em into the boats after
putting up a great show to save the ship. He’ll call on his engineer for
steam and announce that they must beach her. The engineer will either
pretend to start the engines, or swear that he can’t turn ’em over. That
would stampede the crew, if they’re the sort one picks up in these
parts. I think we’ve got to risk it, and give ’em an hour and a half,
certain. After that it depends on how quickly we can pick her up.
Beltramo tells me that she’s fitted with two sea cocks only into her
main hold, because her engines are set well aft. So she’s not likely to
fill within some hours after they’re opened, and I’ve got it doped out
from what I know of Morris’ work that’s the way he’ll put her under, if
that’s what he intends to do; but it’s only little things that are queer
which makes me think that’s what he’s up to. Big gamble, but----”

“Must be. If not, why he not go on to east’ard?” the pilot asked. “I’m
sure of it, captain, sir.”

But Drake was still doubtful when, still in blackness and running at
slow speed, the _Malabart_ nosed out into the sea with the pilot himself
at the wheel and keeping an eye on both time and compass as he took up
the trail. To the commander’s ears it seemed that with the ship so light
that her blades were barely under water the thrash of the slow-turning
screw must be audible for miles. He saw the wheel slowly revolving under
Christophe’s hands and sensed that the pilot was now where he thought
they might find the sinking ship.

Captain Eli knew that both Catlin, and the second mate, Giles, and
nearly all the crew were forward peering into the dimness ahead, but it
seemed impossible to see anything on such a night. It was a matter of
luck, and he felt a dawning apprehension that his luck was out. Watching
the compass over the pilot’s shoulder he saw that the ship had made one
complete circle and was now holding dead ahead. The wheel again whirled,
and they began another circle, a mile deeper in that huge bay surrounded
by high and forbidding mountains, when there came a soft whistle from
forward and a pattering of bare feet. Catlin’s muffled voice came from
below:

“Hold her, sir, hold her. I think we’ve sighted the Rhodialim about two
points off the port quarter.”

Drake jumped to the engine tube--it having been arranged that a man was
to stand by to obviate the use of bells, inasmuch as the sound of an
engine bell might carry far in such stillness--and now the _Malabart_
lost way and came to a stop. The boat, which was swinging barely above
the water, was lowered, and Drake, Catlin, and two men tumbled in and
fell to the oars. They rowed quietly.

“There she is, sir,” Catlin whispered.

Exercising still more caution, they drew down on the dim shape that lay
inert and heavy on the water. They came alongside and listened for
voices, but caught no sound. They found the boat davits hanging idly
over the water, and went up the falls noiselessly, and stood on the
deck. Together they ran here and there, making a search for any human
being. Not until then were they confident that she had been abandoned.
Listening down the main cargo hatch they could hear the swirling and
gurgling of water and the soft bumping of empty cases and crates.

“Get back to the ship, Bill, and rush across all the men that can be
spared; so that if that gang are standing by waiting for the Rhodialim
to sink, we can knock ’em overboard. Tell Christophe to bring the
_Malabart_ alongside twenty minutes after you’ve gone. That’ll give you
time to be back here ahead of her; so if we have to repel boarders,
we’ll have the men to do it. Be as quiet as you can and get a move on.”

Catlin slipped away and over the side like a ghost. After he had gone
Drake listened attentively for a few minutes, then went back and again
bent over the open hatch. Afterward he tried, by leaning far over the
rail, to estimate how deeply the scuttled ship had already sunk. It
seemed to him that she couldn’t last very much longer. Taking an
electric torch from his pocket, he went below. She was a fairly deep
ship, of good draft, and he was pleased to observe that the cabin floors
were not yet damp. He decided that if the sea cocks were of the diameter
given by Giuseppe, the former engineer, she had at least an hour and a
half longer to float. He knew that her fires must have been drawn,
because Morris would not run the risk of the sound of a boiler explosion
drawing attention to the spot, if there chanced to be any boat within
hearing.

“He knows this business of scuttling ships better than any one I ever
heard of,” Drake soliloquized. “But if he cleared off this time, without
waiting to see her under, he made one hell of a mistake.”

He looked at his watch in the light of his torch and meditated: “If Bill
moves lively and doesn’t lose his way, he should be back here in half an
hour from now. If he loses his way in this blamed fog--I’m afraid we cut
it pretty short!”

He climbed back to the deck, went to the port side, from which the boat
had put off, and listened, prepared to answer a hail, if Catlin returned
groping and had to shout to learn his bearings. Then from the opposite
side of the ship, he heard a single telltale thump, as if an oar in
clumsy hands had slipped from an oarlock and brought up with a bang.

Drake ran across to the starboard rail just in time to hear a muttered
imprecation, in colloquial Greek:

“Quiet there, you lubber! If the skipper and those two pets of his are
hanging around, we’ve a fine chance of getting away with anything.”

Drake pursed his lips into a silent whistle, and through his mind ran
the thought: “It’s the crew of this craft come back. Probably suspected
something and are trying somehow to double-cross Morris, Simmons and
whoever they’ve let in on it with ’em. I’m a fool. Should have kept at
least one man with me for such an emergency.”

Quick as was his thought, his action was quicker. He jerked off his
boots and threw off his jacket. He ran aft in the direction that he was
certain the boat must take to board, and leaned over the rail just as a
man started to climb upward.

“Get back into that boat and sheer off,” he called down. “This ship is
abandoned and is salvage.”

The man hesitated, and a voice from below ordered:

“Go on up! We’ll talk this over on deck.”

“Like hell you will!” Captain Eli declared. “And if any man tries to
come on this ship, he’s looking for trouble. Sheer off, if you want a
talk. If you want a fight, come ahead.”

The man holding the boat fall climbed up and got a foothold on the
strake. He threw a hand inward and caught a rail stanchion and swung
upward, encouraged by muttered comments.

“All right! If you will have it----” Drake growled.

And leaned far over, and struck. In the gloom and darkness he had not
struck well, and instead of knocking his man overboard into the boat
below, he merely shifted him outward just beyond reach of a second blow.
Drake threw himself over the rail and hanging by one hand struck again
with the other. It was a body blow, but the man was tenacious, clung to
the rope, swayed like a pendulum, and, as he swung back, kicked at Drake
with his heavy sea boot. But this time Drake’s fist smashed home, and
the boarder grunted, loosened his grip on the boat fall, and went
slithering down among his companions. Drake climbed back over the rail
just in time to feel a stunning smash on the back of his head, and was
not until then aware that while he had engaged one assailant, another
had climbed up the opposite boat fall with a monkey-like agility, and
had come behind him.

Infuriated by the attack, he whirled, seized the man, lifted him as if
he were a bundle of waste, and, with a giant’s heave, threw him far
outward. The man shouted as he fell, but Drake did not hear the splash;
for now he found himself fighting desperately with two other dark shapes
who charged silently. Even as Drake fought, he recalled what he had
overheard, which convinced him that these men also had no wish to recall
Morris and his fellow conspirators. Drake grinned at the humor of that
situation--a scalawag crew trying to steal aboard the ship they had
abandoned, Morris and his fellows somewhere out there in the dark,
himself battling for the salvage like a dog for a bone, and all the
time, down there in the hold, the sea cocks flooding the sinking ship.

The number of his assailants increased. They were urged on by the leader
in a hoarse mutter:

“He’s alone. He must be alone, because no one else comes. Down him! Down
him, because he’s probably got a boat coming!”

Drake fought desperately. Two of his assailants went to the deck and lay
there struggling, as they tried to recover their senses. Veteran fighter
that he was, the participator in events which had earned for him the
sobriquet of The Old Hyena, he used his, head coolly, his fists heavily,
and as he moved here and there slipped out of the dangers of being
cornered and fought for time.

Then came the accident. Retreating, his heels caught over a coil of rope
that had been carelessly left on the deck. He struggled vainly to
recover his balance, but they were on him like a pack of wolves. And in
a fighting, struggling group came to the deck, where they twisted and
turned as he tried to regain his feet, was pulled down, tried again, was
struck heavily over his eyes, saw stars, shook his head like an enraged
bull, and felt himself pinioned to the deck while one of the men he had
previously knocked down arrived in time to kick him in the ribs. He was
now roaring with fury, heedless of all alarms and thinking of nothing
but revenge.

He did not hear the angry shout of Catlin and his men coming on deck.
The hold on him suddenly relaxed. He sat up, rubbing his bruised side
and clearing the blood from his eyes, heard Bill Catlin’s fighting oaths
and got to his feet. Both forward and aft shadowy forms of men in flight
flitted across the decks. He heard Catlin’s shout:

“Don’t let ’em get back to their boat! Knock ’em out and hold ’em.
They’ve probably killed the skipper. If Drake is dead, we’ll drown the
whole damn lot!”

“Yes, don’t let ’em get away, Bill,” Drake shouted, climbing to his feet
and regaining his full senses. “I want ’em. Particularly that fleabitten
rat who gave me the boots. Lash ’em up and get ’em together. Quick! The
ship may sink under us at any time.”

Both he and Catlin ran here and there to bring matters to a conclusion,
and within a few minutes there were seven somewhat bruised and battered
ruffians thrown into the nearest cabins and, despite their protestations
and appeals, locked in. Their leader, who time and again shouted that he
was the second mate of the Rhodialim, was the first to whine for mercy.
He cried, in comprehensible English:

“You hell of an Ingleeshmans tie us up and put us here to drown. You let
us go we make no more of the fights. We go quiet. But capitano, please,
sir, not drown us.”

“Drown nothing!” Drake growled. “If we see that we can’t save the ship,
we’ll bring you up and turn you loose in your boat, you damn pirates!
And listen here! You keep quiet now. We’ve got no more time to waste on
you.” He turned to Catlin and said: “Lock ’em in. We’ve got to fall to,
if we want to keep this craft afloat.”

They hastily ran out to the deck just in time to hear Giles, the second
mate, calling:

“Ship’s coming, sir. Shall I flash a light for ’em, or hail?”

Drake himself cupped his hands and called: “_Malabart_, ahoy! This way!”
When he got a response, he ran back to where he had fallen, struck a
match, found his electric torch that had fallen from his pocket, and
with it as a beacon, directed the _Malabart_ to come alongside.

He called for Beltramo to come aboard to point out the location of the
sea cocks, and for the collision mats to be put across. He set lookouts
to guard against the possibility of other boarders, and himself took a
hand at the work.

“If the others haven’t heard the row, it’s not likely they’ll come
back,” he said. “But we’ll take no chances; we’ll keep as quiet as
possible, just to avoid any more risks of interference. Move lively
now!”

The men of the _Malabart_ ran here and there, their bare feet pattering,
and pulled and hauled a huge, unwieldy mat to the outward side. Then
they ran its looped lines forward and under the ship’s hull. The
_Malabart_ sheered off to give play, and the men fell to the lines,
heaving and tugging, as the mat went over the side and submerged itself
at the point indicated by Beltramo. Throughout their work, running, and
pulling, and hauling, that same air of noiselessness, of low-spoken
orders, was maintained. In the same muffled silence, filled only with
sounds of movement, the other mat was fixed on the starboard side and
drawn taut, and the officers, listening intently down the hatchway, were
encouraged when the sounds of swirling and gurgling were no longer
audible.

A huge cable was brought across from the _Malabart_, fixed through the
for’ard bits. The _Malabart’s_ screw turned, and she slowly moved ahead
until she took the strain of the tow and headed back for the shelter of
the islands where she had lain in wait. Down on the engine-room steps
Captain Eli held his torchlight against a water mark and slowly his face
lost its grimness. His eyes twinkled when he saw the ship was no longer
taking in an appreciable or dangerous quantity of water. He mentally
estimated the time, and muttered: “We’ll make it, sure, unless she
springs another leak, or the mats fail!”

Neither accident came, and in the dawn the _Malabart_ towed her salvage
into the sheltered waters, slacked off and came alongside as the
Rhodialim’s anchors splashed into the sea. Drake, going across to his
own ship, where the cook was serving out hot mugs of coffee, gulped one,
and eyed the remnants of the two packing cases that Forbes had opened on
the _Malabart’s_ deck. Two centrifugal pumps, stocky and powerful,
squatted there in the midst of the confusion, and the engineer was
directing the fitting of the steam lines.

“We’ll lash the ships alongside. It’s safe, I think, and it’s so still
in these waters they’ll not chafe,” Drake said to Catlin and the
engineer. And that maneuver was quickly effected. The pump suckers were
hauled across and splashed into the half-drowned hull of the salvaged
ship and a few minutes later two great streams of water were pouring
steadily into the sea. When daylight came the diving apparatus was
planted on the Rhodialim’s deck, and, guided by a water torch, the man
who had abandoned diving made a descent, found the sea cocks and closed
them. And now the salvage was practically assured.

It was nearly noon when Drake said to Catlin:

“Now we’ll go below and get at the bottom of this business. We’ll have a
little chat with that second mate we’ve got trussed up.”

They brought the man up to the deck. He was sullen, cowed, and palpably
frightened. Drake regarded him coldly for a full minute, frowning before
he said:

“We brought you up to get at the truth of this. Why did you come back to
the ship? Did Morris send you?”

The man started to evade, to stammer, to make palpably false statements
until Drake threatened with:

“Stow that guff! The only chance you’ve got is to come across with a
clean yarn. If you do that, you’ll get away clean. Now quit your waving
the hook, or back below you go, until I can hand you over to the shore
police in Pirzeus. If it suits you better to talk Greek---- Christophe,
come here and tell me what this man says. I want to get it straight.”

Christophe came, added his own urgings to overcome the man’s reluctance,
and then listened with a dry grin to a voluble confession. Now and then
he interrupted with a question, and although Drake understood the gist
of the mate’s words, Christophe finally turned and in his own way told
what he had learned.

“Thees man, he think maybe he and these other mens can maybe get lots of
little things like chronometers and glasses and such what left behind;
so after lost Captain Morris boat in fog, they row back see if she still
afloat, and come aboard. He swear he not know anything about how she
sink on purpose. Engineer what Morris frien’ run on deck, yell she
sprung big leak, and Morris make fuss, and then say no hope and mus’
take to boats. When these man come aboard and find you, they thinks
maybe ship not sink after all, and if they can get her back they make
lot of money for save her. So, fight like hell. He swear that all he
know. Maybe he spik truth, I think so.”

Drake stared at the man for a moment. Then, with apparent irrelevance,
he asked Christophe:

“How do people go by land from Nauplia to Pirzeus, and how long does it
take?”

“Road over the mountains, sir. Easy go. But take maybe two, three days.”

“Telephone, I suppose?”

“Sure, captain, sir. Nauplia fine city. One time capital of Greece
and----”

“Good! You tell this man we’re going to keep ’em aboard the _Malabart_
until we get ready to make it to Piræus, and that nothing will happen to
them, unless they try to leave before we get ready for them to go.”

The mate of the Rhodialim understood, and broke into profuse promises;
but to make certain that they could not escape, Drake had all the boats
of the _Malabart_ brought around to the salvaged ship, moored, and the
oars taken away, before he liberated his battered prisoners and told the
cook to feed them.

Catlin was still wondering what Drake had in mind when, a few days
later, the Rhodialim was ready to put to sea under her own steam. Then
Drake said to his mate:

“Mr. Catlin, you take Beltramo and whatever scratch crew you need for
the engine room and ship, and go aboard the Rhodialim and follow us to
Piræus; but first have the boat that scum came in brought around, chuck
in grub and water enough to take them to Nauplia, then chuck them in
after it and tell ’em to go and be damned to ’em.”

The mate’s wonder ceased on the day when the two ships came to the
crowded docks of the Greek seaport, amid the babbling exclamations of
those who recognized the salvaged ship. Drake called to Catlin to
accompany him, and they walked from the docks to make their official
reports.

“We ought to get a neat bit of salvage money out of this trip,” Catlin
said.

“We’ll get that all right. And I’m going to cut it up--half of it,
anyhow, among every man that was with us. Christophe ought to get a good
chunk, and so should Beltramo.”

“But what I can’t get is why you held that gang of beach combers until
we were ready to come here,” Catlin said, observing that The Old Hyena
was in high good humor.

“I waited to give Bill Morris and his pals time to get back and swear to
their story of how the ship was lost,” he said. “It’s about time they,
as well as Hakim & Letin, were put out of business.”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the February 4, 1928 issue
of The Popular Magazine.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALVAGE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


