The Project Gutenberg eBook of The price of eggs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The price of eggs

Author: Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release date: June 28, 2024 [eBook #73936]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRICE OF EGGS ***





                           THE PRICE OF EGGS

                          By RANDALL GARRETT

                        ILLUSTRATED by SUMMERS

             _Royal babies were pretty important on Dynak,
              even if they did hatch out of eggs. So when
               Boccaccio di Vino mated with the Shannil,
               everyone held their breath. Especially di
               Vino. He might not have much more of it._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
           Fantastic Science Fiction Stories December 1959.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"You'll find things a lot different out here, Lieutenant," said Colonel
Hastings as he eyed the newly-arrived officer in a manner which was
intended to be detached, and which failed by a narrow margin to do
quite that. He levelled his gaze.

Lieutenant Donald John Newhouse nodded his head just the slightest and
said, "Yes, sir."

"I appreciate the fact that you have been specially trained for this
work," the colonel went on, "and I appreciate that Sector Headquarters
must think very highly of you to send you out on something like this.
But it is my own personal opinion that it takes more than theoretical
work to understand the situation on an alien planet that one has never
visited. You've got to live with it."

"Yes, sir," said Lieutenant Newhouse again. There was little else he
could say; there was no point in arguing with the colonel. He was well
aware that Colonel Hastings was angry because he had been unable to
solve the problem that was facing him here on Dynak, and because Sector
Headquarters had sent in a new man to do it--and a fresh-faced junior
officer, at that. Logically, the colonel should have been angry with
himself, not with Newhouse, but man does not function by logic alone.

Colonel Hastings toyed with a pink paperweight with one hand and
scratched his button nose with the other, while his eyes remained
steadily on Newhouse. "I also appreciate the fact that you...."

Newhouse listened respectfully to what the colonel had to say, mentally
making a note to the effect that Colonel Hastings, on his own word, was
a very appreciative man. He seemed to appreciate everything.

"... And I assure you that you will have every bit of data which we
have so far obtained at your disposal."

He paused, and Newhouse, sensing that he should make some reply, said:
"Thank you, sir; that will be very helpful."

The colonel sighed. "Very well. Don't hesitate to call on me for
anything, Lieutenant. And--uh--" He paused suddenly looking wistful,
like a kicked collie.

"Yes, sir?" said Newhouse respectfully.

"--uh--I trust you will keep me informed--ah--for my own information."

"As much as possible, sir," said Newhouse, trying hard not to feel
sorry for the colonel.

"Very well," Colonel Hastings said morosely. "Unless there are any
questions, you may go."

Newhouse detected the hopeful note in the other man's voice and
responded. "I really don't think I can ask any intelligent questions
until I've studied the problem thoroughly, sir."

The colonel looked gratified. "Very well. I appreciate your concern,
Lieutenant. Thank you."

"Thank _you_, sir," Lieutenant Newhouse said saluting. Then he turned
on his heel and left the office.

       *       *       *       *       *

He moseyed over to the broad swath of green park that had been left
as a relaxation spot when the base had been built. It wasn't crowded;
there were only two or three men sitting on the benches, smoking and
talking quietly. Newhouse found a bench to himself and sat down to mull
things over.

There was nothing totally new in the situation here on Dynak. Newhouse,
as a trouble-shooter, knew that, even if Colonel Hastings didn't. Dynak
was one of the many worlds which Man had decided not to colonize in
spite of its inviting appearance. The biochemistry of the plants and
animals was just a little too different to be compatible with Man,
which meant that the planet would have to be wiped clean and started
over in order to provide a suitable environment for human beings. And,
aside from the fact that such a step would mean destroying millions
of species that would better be preserved for study, it would mean the
death of the several million humanoid natives of the planet--something
that Man had no desire to be responsible for.

Dynak Base was not a military establishment; the Space Force as a whole
used only a minor part of its energies for military purposes. Most of
its activities were scientific in nature. Nonetheless, any base such
as this had to be fortified to a certain extent. There were tribes of
humanoids in the immediate vicinity which were, like all such cultural
units at that stage of development, intensely hostile to anything
strange. Right now, the majority of them were warily friendly with the
Earthmen, but there was no way of knowing how long that uneasy peace
might last. Meanwhile, they were doing useful work--bringing in samples
of various types of fauna and flora for the labs to work on.

It all sounded fine so far, Newhouse thought grumpily. But the catch
lay in the word "humanoid." Any reasonably intelligent race was
classified as "humanoid" if they were erect, bifurcate animals--a
definition which covered a multitude of variations. Most of them
you wouldn't want to meet alone in a dark alley, and if you did, it
would be a toss-up as to which of you would be the most frightened.
Oddly-colored skins, three-eyed faces, and other _outré_ features were
not at all uncommon among them.

Dynak was different. The humanoids were near human. The brown-yellow
pigment in their skins wasn't melanin, and it was another pigment that
gave them the intensely blue-violet eye coloring; they had different
kinds of glands inside, arranged differently; they were almost entirely
hairless, except for soft patches of down on the top of the head;
and they averaged about four feet seven in height. Not human, no.
Definitely not _homo sapiens_.

But they certainly _looked_ human. And, to top the whole thing off, the
females were, to an Earthman's eyes, as pretty as little dolls. Except
that dolls are normally not built so enticingly.

They weren't _all_ beautiful, true, but there were enough beauties to
tempt the weary Earthman. And those who weren't weary were even more
tempted.

Their body chemistries were incompatible, of course; off-spring from
such a union were impossible. But the union itself was certainly
possible.

Even so, there hadn't been too much trouble. For one thing, there were
plenty of human women on Dynak Base; for another, the semi-savage
tribes which occupied the territory around Dynak Base had a rather
_laissez faire_ attitude, and a female's over-friendliness, even with
alien giants from the sky, wasn't frowned upon. And, for a third, the
savage women usually didn't come up to the standards of a fastidious
Earthman, as far as general cleanliness was concerned.

But the women of the semi-barbaric city-state of Oassi, a hundred miles
to the north, were a different matter entirely. Newhouse had never
actually seen any of the native females, but the trimensional, full
color, motion recordings had been graphic enough.

Newhouse could understand perfectly well why Boccaccio di Vino had
managed to get himself into the jam he was in.

       *       *       *       *       *

A man in civilian clothing had been approaching the bench Newhouse was
seated on, but the lieutenant didn't pay much attention until the man
stopped by the bench and said: "Lieutenant Newhouse?"

Newhouse started to rise. "Yes?"

"Sit down, Lieutenant," the other said, sitting down beside Newhouse.
He was a lean, elderly man, with graying hair and a long-jawed, bony
face that managed to show a strong sense of humor in spite of its
saturnine construction. "I'm Bruce MacAuliffe; Colonel Hastings said
you wanted to talk to me."

Newhouse swallowed. "Well, yes, sir; I did. But you didn't have to--"

MacAuliffe raised a hand. "That's all right. Hastings has his own way
of doing things. There's no point in raising a fuss. And besides, I
imagine you want to get things started. Something has to be done about
di Vino."

MacAuliffe was the head of the Diplomatic Section on Dynak, and
an outstanding expert on anthropology and xenology; Newhouse felt
flattered that the man had taken the trouble to seek him out.

"Something has to be done, all right," Newhouse agreed, "but I'm not
quite sure what at this point. In spite of the reports, I still don't
have the whole picture."

MacAuliffe lifted a thin eye brow. "No? I thought my reports were
comprehensive enough." But there was a definite twinkle in his eyes.

Newhouse grinned. "Hastings thinks the job can't be done till I've
spent six months here because it's impossible to learn from reports;
you think I can hop off immediately and get di Vino out of this jam,
because everything can be learned from reports. It's a rough life we
lead."

The diplomat grinned back. "Just what is it you want to know,
Lieutenant?"

Newhouse then scratched thoughtfully at the area just behind his right
ear. "Details, mostly, I guess. You and di Vino and the others went
to Oassi to square away the details of this contract with the local
government, and di Vino managed to get himself married. All as plain as
my Aunt Millie's face. But I don't quite get a picture of Boccaccio di
Vino the man nor of the personalities of the women involved."

MacAuliffe said: "I see. Well, di Vino himself is a very personable
young man; good conversationalist and a fine diplomat--for a young man.
He shows promise of getting somewhere in the field."

"Won't this caper sort of put a black mark on his record?"

MacAuliffe rubbed his long, thin nose sadly. "I'm afraid it will, yes.
Shame, too. Mr. di Vino acted with the impetuosity of youth, and it'll
probably follow him well into his old age."

"By then," said Newhouse, "he'll be bragging about it."

"Probably. He's just the type, though, who's a push-over for a set-up
like that; pretty faces and figures go to his head. He and the Shannil,
for instance, were...."

Newhouse listened while MacAuliffe talked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cultural level of the city-state of Oassi was similar in many
ways to that of Egypt in the fifteenth century B.C., or that of
pre-classical Athens or Sparta. It differed strongly, however, in
that it was essentially a matriarchy. Since the natives of Dynak were
oviparous, the women were freed from the temporary disability that
child-bearing brought to viviparous species. In the more savage tribes,
the females suckled the young and cared for them from hatching until
they were old enough to fend for themselves; in Oassi, however, most
of the care of the young had been handed over to the males while the
females ran the state. The fighters were of both sexes, carefully
segregated into male and female battalions, but the top officers were
all females.

Dynak Base had been built well away from Oassi; one of the strict
rules of Earth was that no indigenous culture should be subjugated or
influenced any more than necessary. Before any contact was made, a
study of the more savage tribes had to be made.

Nonetheless, rumors had come out of the jungle that a strange group of
aliens had built a fortress near the banks of the Ngong River, and the
people of Oassi were aware of the presence of the Earthmen long before
any contact had been made by the Earthmen themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eventually, diplomatic relations between the Earthmen and the Oassi
people had been established simply because the Oassi army had sent an
expeditionary force to find out the intentions of the strangers. There
had been no actual fighting; the female general in charge of the troops
had decided that it would be futile to attack Dynak Base and had asked,
instead, for a parley.

The upshot of the whole incident was a decision to send a diplomatic
party to Oassi itself. And Boccaccio di Vino had been a member of that
party.

The trouble was that, at that time, di Vino and the others didn't know
a great deal about the customs and mores of the Oassi. More exactly,
di Vino didn't know that just holding hands with an Oassi girl was
tantamount to a formal engagement. And di Vino hadn't just stopped with
holding hands. After the party had been in the city sixty-three days,
di Vino found himself legally married to Oanella, the daughter of the
Shann and Shanni of Oassi, and heir to the throne. When the old Shanni
died, Oanella would become Shanni, and di Vino, as her consort, would
become Shann whether he liked it or not.

It might sound like a good position to be in, and, in a human society,
it could have been just fine. But Oassi was not a human city, and di
Vino wanted desperately to get out and go back to Dynak Base--even
farther away, if possible.

Oassi had a pleasant little law regarding the crown princess and the
Shanni. If no fertile eggs were laid within the first two hundred days
of marriage, it was the duty of the royal personage to get herself
another husband. But since monogamy was strictly enforced, and
since no one, not even the Shanni, could re-marry while the spouse
remained alive, the only way out for her highness was the obvious one.
Consequently, Boccaccio di Vino had found himself facing death.

"The big trouble," said MacAuliffe, "is that the young Shannil seems to
be actually proud of di Vino; her 'giant' is something for the lesser
nobles to envy." His face darkened. "She'll probably miss him very
much."

"We can't let them kill him," Newhouse said flatly.

"I hope not," MacAuliffe said, "but, outside of storming their city, I
don't see how we can get him out of the citadel."

"I'll think of a way," Newhouse said grimly. "I'm going into the city
with the next food convoy."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sometimes," said Master Sergeant Pemberton in a low voice, "I think
this whole thing is a waste of time." He turned the wheel of the car a
trifle to avoid a tree, then twisted it back to avoid another.

Newhouse stuck a cigarette in his mouth, fired it. "What? You mean,
taking di Vino food? He might get pretty hungry."

"I didn't mean that, Lieutenant; I wouldn't want to let him starve.
But driving in all this chow every so often, over a hundred miles of
jungle, isn't my idea of an efficient way to run an outfit."

"What would you do, if it were your job to decide policy?" Newhouse
asked, genuinely curious.

"Just what the colonel's doing now," Pemberton said. "I realize it's
the only sensible way. But there are times when I wish we could just
walk in there, pull out our guns, and tell them to hand him over or
else."

"Sure," said Newhouse, "but who'd raise _gakgaks_ for us then? You want
to raise a whole herd and milk 'em yourself?"

"My mother didn't raise her little Willie to be a herdsman for alien
critters," the sergeant said virtuously. "Besides, I wouldn't know how,
and I'm not anxious to learn. Those things smell worse than a herd of
sick hogs."

"Same thing I'd say," Newhouse agreed. "But Earth would scream so loud
they could be heard in Messier 31 if their only supply of anti-cancer
serum were to be cut off, or even reduced. And if you know of any way
to get it except from _gakgak_ milk, a grateful galaxy will prostrate
itself at your feet."

"I'd feel pretty silly if they did," said Pemberton, wrenching the
wheel around to avoid another tree. "But it's a hell of a note that Dr.
Chung had to find the stuff in _gakgak_ milk at all. Why couldn't he
have been sensible and found it in tree leaves or something? Then we
wouldn't have to stay on good terms with a bunch of high-handed female
dictators."

"No," said Newhouse, "probably not. But we'd probably have to stay on
good terms with the savages around the base so they'd go out and gather
leaves for us. What's the difference?"

"The difference," Pemberton said triumphantly, "is that we wouldn't
have to worry about the care and feeding of our boy, di Vino."

"Um," said Newhouse, realizing when he'd been beaten.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pemberton glanced in his rear view mirror. "They having trouble back
there? No, I guess not; they just slowed down a little."

Newhouse swiveled his head around and peered at the second car, which
was following them. Like their own, it floated a foot off the ground
on its antigravs as it moved through the jungle. It didn't seem to be
having any trouble.

"There's another thing, Lieutenant," Pemberton said. "I don't like the
idea of carrying a dame along. Not that she's any trouble, but she
might get hurt. This isn't exactly the cornfields of Iowa, you know."

"I think Captain Smith can take care of herself," Newhouse said. "She's
a pretty tough gal."

"I'd rather have her on my side than against me, that's for sure," the
sergeant admitted, "but my protective instincts always rise when I see
a woman out in the wilds like this. Even if she is an officer."

Newhouse started to answer, but there was a pounding on the roof of the
car. Pemberton slowed, rolled down the window, stuck out his head, and
said something in a language Newhouse didn't understand.

Ksitka, a hunter from one of the tribes near Dynak Base, jabbered
something back in the same tongue. Pemberton pulled his head back in.

"He says he smells trouble. There's a group of those lizard-like
carnivores up ahead--two or three, he says. We'll have to go around
'em; I don't want to get tangled up with those babies." He turned the
wheel, and the car angled to the right. "Can't go to the left," he
explained. "There's a cliff there that we couldn't make."

For a long minute, he was silent. Then: "And that's another thing,
Lieutenant; we have to keep these cars close to the ground. If we could
fly 'em, we'd have been to Oassi hours ago. But no, just because we're
not to reveal our strength to the natives, we have to go creeping along
like snails. Why, when I...."

Newhouse folded his arms across his chest and closed his eyes. Sergeant
Pemberton was a compulsive griper, but his droning voice made a nice
lullaby.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they hove into sight of the city gates of Oassi, Pemberton shook
the lieutenant. "We're here, sir. Their scouts spotted us twenty miles
back, and the guard of honor is lined up, waiting for us."

Newhouse shoved himself into a more upright position and looked out at
the pygmy-sized natives lined up in gorgeous array, in brightly-colored
kilts and feathers. They looked, Newhouse opined, like a cross between
a regiment of Scottish Highlanders and a group of Zulu warriors in full
battle array. Each man had a longbow and a quiver of arrows slung
across the back of his shoulders, and each was carrying a seven-foot,
metal-tipped spear in his right hand.

"Very impressive," said Newhouse. "Okay, Sergeant; let's get our own
show on the road."

Both men got out of the car and marched solemnly back to the second
car. Ksitka slid off the top of the car and marched back with them,
looking very proud and haughty in his resplendent Earth-designed
uniform, which was even gaudier than those of the Oassi forces.

At the door of the rear car, they paused. Newhouse opened it, and all
three bowed low as Captain Virginia Smith emerged.

She was not in uniform, as the other spacemen were; she wore an array
of robes and jewels that would have looked pretentious at a British
Coronation. She was a tall woman; a full six feet in height; broad in
proportion, she was a thirty-six year old career officer who could look
both commanding and matronly.

Ksitka, who had been carefully coached in his role, ran around behind
her and lifted the train of her robes so that they would not drag the
ground. Then the four of them marched solemnly up to the honor guard,
Newhouse and Pemberton in the lead, with Captain Smith and Ksitka
trailing behind, leaving the cars in charge of the driver of the second
vehicle.

The Oassi guard, trying very hard not to look impressed, closed ranks
and marched to the city gates with them. Newhouse had already noticed
the effect that had been produced, however. The Oassi could see that
Virginia Smith was obviously a woman, and a very powerful one at that.
Thus, she commanded a respect that mere males could not have hoped for.

At the gate, the procession was met by a trio of Oassi females whose
dress, impressive though it was, couldn't even compare with that of
Captain Smith. Even little Ksitka's uniform was flashier.

Ksitka himself was in absolute ecstasy, in spite of the fact that his
face was as stony and expressionless as an Easter Island idol's. His
tribe had been looked down on and sneered at by the city-dwellers since
time immemorial. And now, he, Ksitka the Hunter, was superior to the
Oassi. It was a good feeling, and Ksitka was revelling in it.

The three Oassi bowed low as the Earthmen approached, and one of them
said: "Her Splendor, the Shanni, awaits you at the citadel. May I
inquire as to the rank of our honored guest?"

Newhouse had studied the Oassi language, and, although his accent
was a bit heavy, he was perfectly lucid. "This is Her Supremacy, the
Captain," he said with dignity.

"_Kepteen?_" the Oassi woman repeated. "An exalted rank, no doubt."

"No doubt at all," Newhouse agreed rather ambiguously. "She has come to
pay her respects to her sister, the Shanni."

       *       *       *       *       *

That made Captain Smith's rank perfectly clear; as a "sister", she was
obviously the equal of the Shanni.

"Come this way," the officer said. "Transportation has been provided.
I am afraid, however, that we must apologize to Her Supremacy for the
inadequacy of the sedan chair we provided; we were not prepared for the
visit of so exalted a personage."

"I will speak to Her Supremacy," Newhouse said. He turned to Captain
Smith. "They want to apologize because they haven't got a sedan chair
fancy enough for you," he said in English. "They're really impressed."

"I thought that's what the gal said," replied the captain, keeping her
face haughty. "I can understand the language better than I can speak
it. What should I say?"

"Anything you like; you're doing fine. Say something to me, and look as
condescending as possible."

"Very well," she said, complying, "convey my compliments and tell them
they can all go stick their noses in their ears and blow their brains
out."

"Thank you," said Newhouse, bowing low. "I'll tell them, but it may
lose something in translation."

He turned to the officer and reverted to Oassi. "Her Supremacy
understands your lack of proper transportation perfectly, and she will
convey her apologies to the Shanni for this unexpected visit. Her
Supremacy realizes that you are not at all to blame for not providing
a sedan chair suitable for her rank, and she has therefore graciously
condescended to wait until a chair of suitable dignity is provided for
the remainder of the way."

"Her Supremacy is most gracious," said the diminutive officer, gazing
up at the towering captain in awe. "There will be as little delay as
possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

She turned and barked orders at a squad of husky males standing nearby,
and they turned and trotted off at high speed. It was nearly fifteen
minutes before they returned, during which time the Earthmen and the
Oassi tried to outdo each other in displaying nothing but stolid
patience.

The "chair of suitable dignity" was quite something. It was painted a
rust red and decorated with gold leaf and polished but unfaceted gems.
It took a dozen of the little aliens, six on either side, to hoist the
thing off the ground and carry it after Captain Smith had climbed in.
She was obviously a little cramped in a conveyance built for someone
two-thirds her size, but she bore it with dignified hauteur. Ksitka,
looking very superior, trotted along beside the sedan chair; he was
big for a Dynakian, standing a good three inches taller than the
city-dwellers.

Newhouse and Pemberton had climbed into the less brightly decorated
chairs that they'd provided, and were carried along behind the captain
as the procession wound its way through the streets of the city toward
the citadel.

A runner had been sent on ahead to warn the Shanni that an unexpected
guest was coming, and she and her rather diminutive consort were on the
top step of the citadel, flanked by another batch of guardsmen when the
guests arrived. Her daughter, the Shannil, and her consort, Boccaccio
di Vino, were nowhere to be seen.

_That's partial confirmation, at least_, Newhouse thought wryly. The
jungle tribesmen who had occasion to trade in the city had brought word
back that the Shannil feared that her new husband might take it in his
head to return to his own people--a crime which, like suicide, might
not be punishable when successful, but to try and fail was a criminal
offense in Oassi. Evidently the citadel guards were making sure that
lover-boy didn't go over the hill.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not that he'd ever been allowed much freedom. The royal family had kept
a wary eye on him ever since the wedding; the old Shanni seemed to have
a hunch that di Vino hadn't realized he was a bridegroom until it was
too late, and she had seemed to sense right away that he was not too
keen on the idea of staying.

As arranged, it was Sergeant Pemberton who performed all the amenities
and introductions between Her Supremacy, the Captain, and Her Splendor,
the Shanni. In the first place, his Oassish was better, and, in the
second, Newhouse wanted to observe the expressions on the faces of the
Shanni and the Shann.

The Shann was an elderly male who looked--naturally--rather henpecked.
He didn't say much; he just stood there and smiled half-heartedly as
the Shanni chatted in friendly fashion with her "sister," Captain
Virginia Smith, through the fluent interpretation of Pemberton. They
might have been any ruling family of Earth welcoming another chief
executive.

Pemberton, of course, was giving the impression that Captain Smith
was the ruler of the alien fortress that was situated a hundred miles
away, on the banks of the Ngong River. The people of Oassi hadn't been
informed of the true origin of the Earthmen, nor would they be; as far
as Oassi was concerned, they came from a "far land," and knew a little
something about magic, but they weren't dangerous, they just had to be
watched, like any other non-Oassi group. And, after all, Oassi had a
much larger army and the magicians and priests of Oassi had magic, too,
didn't they? _Sure_ they did.

And Earth, the capital of the United Commonwealth of Planets, not only
liked the way things stood, but demanded that they be kept that way.
Any civilization which appeared to be capable of lifting itself by its
own bootstraps should do so; at this stage of the game, Man should not
interfere. Of course, their very presence on the planet had already
changed, somewhat, the course of Oassi's history, but that couldn't be
helped; nothing can be observed without affecting it.

The Shanni of Oassi appeared to be pleasantly impressed with Captain
Smith, just as Newhouse had figured. She had certainly not been
impressed by human males, which was perfectly understandable. What
would Haroun al Rashid have said if some other country had sent a
delegation of women to Baghdad?

Oh, the Shanni had been perfectly happy to agree to a treaty to furnish
_gakgak_ milk for good, honest gold (well, maybe not _too_ honest; it
was the product of an atomic converter), but that was just business.
Gold is fine stuff, even if a lowly male brings it.

But when it came to statesmanship, that was a different matter. The
Shanni seemed obviously more at home with Captain Smith, even if the
conversation did have to be filtered through Sergeant Pemberton.

After a minute or two, the Shanni turned to a nearby officer and gave
her a slight nod. The whole guard unit wheeled about in precision array
and everyone marched into the citadel: a half dozen guards in the lead,
followed by the Shanni and Shann, and Captain Smith; Pemberton and
Newhouse followed them, and behind the two officers came the rest of
the guardsmen. And last, but foremost, came the carriers bearing the
precious bundles of Earth-type food.

       *       *       *       *       *

The banquet that night was a sumptuous, but somewhat lopsided affair,
Newhouse thought. The Oassi stuffed themselves like pigs, and the
four Earth people ate nothing. The Shanni already understood that her
guests, for some mysterious reason, could not partake of Oassi food.

Boccaccio di Vino and his wife, the Shannil, had made their
appearance, and di Vino, still a diplomat, put on an excellent face,
but there was worry in his eyes.

Newhouse wanted to pump some information out of him, but he didn't dare
address him in English, for fear that the Shanni might suspect a plot
was being fomented at her banquet table, right under her nose. But that
was just the reason why he had told Captain Smith not even to speak the
few words of Oassish that she did know.

       *       *       *       *       *

He smiled at her and said: "Captain, I'm going to be talking to our
friend, the bridegroom, but pretend I'm addressing you. I'm not going
to mention your name," he went on, knowing that di Vino was listening,
"because they'd recognize the words. Captain, say something in a
questioning tone. Something fairly long."

"Fine," she said, "because I do have a question to ask. How long do you
think we'll have to be here before we can get our diplomat out?"

"I don't know. That's why I want to ask some questions." Then he turned
to the Shanni and smiled. "Her Supremacy wishes to inquire as to the
health of the royal family, if that is not forbidden by rules of
etiquette." He knew perfectly well that it wasn't.

"Not at all," said the Shanni, in her rather high, brittle voice. "Our
family is quite well. All sound in body and mind. Although--" A small
smile came to her face, and something shone in her eyes. "--we await
fertile eggs."

"I see." He turned to Captain Smith, but his words were obviously meant
for di Vino. "Don't speak to Smith until I've spoken to you in Oassish.
What I want to know is, how many unfertile clutches of eggs has your
wife produced so far, and how long is the production cycle?"

Captain Smith nodded. "Tell me, what am I supposed to do?"

"Just look at the Shanni and smile, then smile _very_ benignly on the
Shannil."

While that was going on, Newhouse turned pleasantly to di Vino. "And
how are you and your wife, Your Eminence?"

"Quite well, thank you," said di Vino suavely. "We expect to have a
family before long, you know."

"Indeed? I hope your attempts will be successful."

"We all do," said the Shannil in a smooth voice. Looking at her,
Newhouse could see why, in spite of her alienness, she had been the
cause of di Vino's troubles.

There was a momentary silence around the room.

Then di Vino looked at Smith and said casually: "I don't know who you
are, Lieutenant, but if you can get me out of this mess, you can have
my right arm. To answer your question, my--uh--wife produces an egg
every sixty-five days or thereabouts. The fertilization has to take
place about twenty days before the cycle is completed. Since I've been
here, she's produced two. If the next one isn't fertile, I'll end up in
the family mausoleum, accompanied by much lamentation." He paused and
smiled at Captain Smith expectantly.

Smith smiled back. "I have a question, if you two don't mind. If that's
the case, it seems to me that these people could have a child every
sixty-five days. They'd have overrun the planet centuries ago."

"No," di Vino said. "Even the cycles have cycles--or epicycles, maybe.
The females produce three or four, stop for about four years before
another cycle comes on. I just happened to catch this girl at the wrong
time; otherwise, I wouldn't be married now."

"I see," said the captain. She smiled pleasantly.

Before di Vino could say anything in answer, the Shanni's voice cut
in--rather sharply, Newhouse thought. "Are you a relative of the
Kapteen, my dear?" she asked di Vino.

"No, Your Splendor," said di Vino.

"Well, in Oassi, well-bred princes don't speak to visiting ladies to
whom they are not related. And remember, my dear, you're an Oassi now."

"I beg forgiveness, your Splendor," di Vino said humbly.

That put somewhat of a chill on the whole dinner party. Conversation
from that point on was utterly innocuous and utterly boring.

Newhouse only got one more small piece of information. The Shanni's
consort, the Shann, had made a remark about having "produced his three
eggs," and further conversation elicited the information that each
Shanni or Shannil was supposed to have three children by her consort.
Newhouse marked it down in his mental files for later use when he
formed a plan.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the meal was finally finished, the visitors were taken to their
quarters in a wing of the citadel reserved for visitors, well away
from the wing reserved for the Shanni and Shann.

The citadel itself was built strongly, with the thick walls of a
fortress, and the heavy silverwood doors--white as limed oak and hard
as teak--were capable of being barred from either side. Although the
Earthmen were not locked in, there was an "honor" guard in the hall
outside, and Newhouse had no doubt that any idea he might have of
roaming about the citadel would be politely but firmly vetoed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The apartment that had been assigned to them was hardly comfortable by
modern Terrestrial standards, though a medieval English baron would
probably have been cozy enough.

"Looks like a jail, sir," said Sergeant Pemberton as he surveyed the
room.

"It is," said Newhouse. "I'm afraid that freedom of the grounds isn't
on our agenda." He walked over to the door that connected his and the
sergeant's room with the one next to it.

"Come in, Lieutenant," said Virginia Smith.

Newhouse pushed open the heavy door. "I'm going to take a flit about
the citadel, Captain," he said. "Would you and the sergeant whip up
something to eat? I shouldn't be gone long."

"All right. But watch yourself. My Supremacy might be a little hard put
to explain what you were doing if you got caught."

"Don't worry; I'm supposed to get an Earthman out of a jam, not get
another one in. You want to give me that harness?"

"Sure. Close the door and give me two minutes."

Newhouse did as he'd been asked. Captain Smith had been wearing an
antigrav harness under her robes. Since none of the three was obviously
carrying a sword, axe, or spear, it had been assumed that they were
unarmed, except, perhaps, for a small dagger or the like, which
was perfectly permissible. But the Oassi had no idea what the term
"miniaturization" meant. Newhouse, Pemberton, and Smith were all armed
to the teeth.

Even so, an antigravity unit required extra clothing to cover it; the
uniforms of Pemberton and Newhouse were a little too close-fitting to
hide it completely.

Captain Smith was better than her word. Less than two minutes later,
she opened the door and handed Newhouse the harness. The lieutenant
put it on and walked over to the narrow, slit-like window that looked
out on the courtyard.

Dynak was a moonless planet, and, at this time of year, the stars that
might have shone in the night sky were obscured by the black blanket of
a nearby dark nebula, a great dust-cloud that shrouded most of the sky.

Except for the flickering torches in the courtyard below and the glow
of candlelight from the windows of the citadel, the walls of the
citadel were in utter darkness. Certainly the guards forty feet below
couldn't see a man crawling along the walls, and they probably wouldn't
believe their eyes if they did.

Newhouse then adjusted the power unit to a point where he only weighed
a few ounces and lifted his feet off the floor, doubling his knees
up against his abdomen. Since his mass remained the same, he drifted
downwards very slowly under the slight pull of attenuated gravity.

"You're not completely neutralized," Captain Smith then pointed out.

"I don't want to be," Newhouse said. "I've got to have a little weight
so that I can get a fingertip purchase on that rough wall. Otherwise,
I'm likely to push myself away from it, and I don't want to use the
air jet unless I have to." He landed lightly on his heels and then
stood up slowly, so as not to push himself off the floor again. He
slid, rather than walked, back to the window. "Bye, kiddies," he said.
"Save me a sandwich." And he eased himself out the window.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was gone longer than he had thought he would be. It took him nearly
an hour to find which of the windows in the royal wing opened into
Boccaccio di Vino's bedroom, moving himself carefully across the stone
wall of the citadel, avoiding windows, staying out of sight of the
patrols that walked the upper parapets, and keeping his ears open for
the distinctive sound of the Earthman's voice. He even found time to
curse the nomadic tribes that roamed the grass plains to the south
because their very existence kept the city of Oassi in a perpetual
state of preparedness against raids, which meant that there were
lookouts and guards all over the place and he had to be extra cautious.

At each window, he had to skirt around it, pause and listen, then
carefully ease a tiny spy-eye out to take a look inside, until he
found di Vino's quarters.

[Illustration: For the royal couple the future did not look bright.]

When he finally found them, he had to wait another ten minutes while di
Vino and the young Shannil concluded a rather strained conversation.
When the Shannil walked off toward her own room, Newhouse peeked his
head around the edge of the window and said: "Hssst! Di Vino!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The young diplomat jerked his head around quickly. When he saw who it
was, he ran quickly to the window. "What is it?" he asked. "Are we
getting out of here?"

"Not just yet. I'm getting you out of here all nice and legal-like, if
I can. We won't use force except as the last resort." He didn't add
that such a "very last resort" might be too late for di Vino.

"But--how?"

"Never mind that now; I've got to get some information. It's vitally
necessary. I tried to get it at the banquet, but the Shanni shut you
up."

"Sure. Anything you want."

"Well, I know all about the cyclic pattern of Dynakian reproduction,
but I need _specific_ information. Times and dates, right down to the
minute, if possible."

"That's easy," di Vino said wryly. "The Shanni is keeping pretty
accurate records, and so is Oanella. She knows by now that I don't love
her, and she's going to be perfectly happy to get rid of me. She--"

"Never mind that now!" Newhouse snapped in irritation. "The _dates_
man! The _dates_!"

Hurriedly, di Vino told him. When he did, Newhouse breathed a sigh of
relief. "Good! We've got three days yet!" He fished into his jacket and
came out with a small, black cylinder a little larger than a cigarette,
with a small stud at one end. "You know how to use a sleep gun?"

Di Vino nodded.

"Good. Take it. Keep it on you at all times. Day after tomorrow when
Oanella goes to sleep for the night, use it on her. But, for heavens
sake, _wait till she gets to sleep_. Got that?"

"Right. Then what?"

"Then wait for me to show up. That sleep gun's got a signal built into
it. As soon as you shoot her, I'll know about it. All you'll have to
do is blow out your candles, so that there's no light coming from your
room. Got that?"

"I've got it. But--"

There were footsteps outside the door. "So long," Newhouse whispered.
"Don't slip up." He moved away from the window just as the door opened,
and he heard the Shannil say: "What's so interesting at the window,
dear? Getting homesick?" There was more than a trace of sarcasm in her
voice.

Newhouse made his way back to his own quarters as fast as he could.

"Hope I didn't worry anyone," he said as he popped into the window.

"Nope," said Pemberton. "We figured if you'd been caught there would
have been an uproar and we'd have heard about it. Come in and have a
sandwich. And some coffee."

"In a minute," said Newhouse. "I've got some radioing to do."

"The call box is on the table," said Captain Virginia Smith.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day was largely devoted to discussion between Her Supremacy,
the Captain, and Her Splendor, the Shanni, on the increased production
of _gakgak_ milk. The Shanni, after much careful negotiation, promised
that more would be forthcoming.

Newhouse, personally, had a hunch that the Shanni was trying to
negotiate a treaty with the southern nomads for _gakgak_ milk, with the
intent of selling it to the Earthmen at a profit--which was all right
with everyone, if she could swing it.

The third day was much like the second, but this time, Newhouse began
to inject something new into the discussions--presumably suggestions
from Captain Smith.

"Would it be possible, Your Splendor, to have the young Shannil's
consort return home for a space of--say, ten days?"

A wary look came into the old woman's eyes, but the smile never left
her face. "The Shannexa's home is Oassi," she said smoothly.

"True, true. We apologize for the error in terminology. Let us say,
rather, that we would like to have him visit his previous home."

The Shanni looked almost apologetic. "It would be my pleasure to allow
the dear child to revisit his old home," she said, "but, alas, it
cannot be."

"Indeed?"

"I fear not. The ancient laws of Oassi are very strict on that
point, and I would not dare to violate them. Even the Shanni is not
all-powerful. My people would disown me if I violated so powerful a
taboo."

"Just what is this--ah--law, Your Splendor?"

"A very ancient one, Your Supremacy. No royal consort may leave his
wife until he produces his three eggs. Three off-spring, in other
words, of which at least one must be a girl."

"Ah, well, of course, we would hesitate to ask you to violate so
powerful a law. We will be content to wait. But you will permit the
visit at that time?"

The Shanni smiled thinly. "I give you my solemn vow that he will be
permitted to leave when--and _if_--that time arrives."

_Well, well, well_, Newhouse thought to himself, _the old dame suspects
already that her daughter can never have children by di Vino. She's out
after his hide. And it's getting more obvious by the minute._

"And how long do you estimate that to be, Your Splendor?"

The Shanni's eyes became veiled. "You know our law. But, even if the
first egg is produced within the period, I'm afraid it would be another
four years before the next is produced. It would be four years at the
minimum before he could leave."

"Very well. So be it." The subject was dismissed as though it were a
light thing, but Newhouse already had what he wanted. Every Oassi
noble in the room had heard the Shanni make a solemn vow.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night, Newhouse sat by his detector, waiting for it to give the
telltale blink that would come when di Vino fired the sleep gun. When
it did come, Newhouse already had his harness on, and he was out the
window before the glow had died in the telltale. He scuttled crabwise
across the great stone wall of the citadel, but this time he knew
exactly where he was going, and he made it in less than ten minutes.

Di Vino was waiting in the darkened window. "Thank heaven!" he
whispered. "I thought you'd never get here. Now what."

"Where is she?" Newhouse asked.

"Over on the bed."

"Good. Now put a blanket or something over that window so that the
guard can't see a light."

When the window was blacked out and a candle had been lit, Newhouse
bent over the unconscious female. The sleep gun had done its work well.

"All right, di Vino, help me get this harness on her. We're kidnapping
the Shannil."

"Kidnap the--" Di Vino choked and blinked. "But _I'm_ the one who's
supposed to get out of here."

"I'll explain the whole thing when she's gone. Come on! We haven't much
time!"

When the Shannil was securely fixed in the harness, Newhouse turned up
the power until her weight was a minus twenty pounds. Then he fastened
a length of strong plaston cording to the harness. Then he calmly
tossed her out the window. She fell upwards fairly rapidly.

When the cord was taut, Newhouse tied the end of it around the arm of a
heavy silverwood chair. "That's that," he said. "Now all we have to do
is wait."

Boccaccio di Vino said: "Wait? For _what_? What's going on?"

"Your lady-love is about two hundred feet over the citadel, with a
signalling gadget on her. There's been an aircar hovering on its
antigravs up there for the last two hours. When they pick up the
signal, they'll pick up the girl. Simple, isn't it?"

"But what are they going to do?"

Newhouse grinned. "I think I'll let you suffer a while longer. Teach
you to keep away from strange females."

"I've already learned that," di Vino said morosely.

"Then this ought to drive it home, pal. Just sit down and relax; we've
got several hours to kill. Got a drink?"

"Some Scotch," said di Vino in a glum tone. "And a deck of cards, if we
have to kill time. Play cribbage?"

"Yup. Drag 'em out."

The cord moved a little, and Newhouse knew they were taking the Shannil
out of the harness, which would be left there until they came back.

"That's that for a while," he said. "Get the bottle out."

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time the rope was jiggled once more, Lieutenant Newhouse had
taken a week's wages from di Vino at cribbage, to be payable when the
diplomat returned to Dynak Base. Newhouse blew out the candle, went
over and pushed the blanket aside, and took a cautious look up. He
couldn't see a thing, but a second tug on the rope told him that all
was well. He began hauling down on the line. The girl came easily,
since the men in the aircar had reduced her negative weight to zero,
and then added a couple of ounces of positive weight.

When she appeared at the window, the two men pulled her in, and
Newhouse took off the antigravity harness and began putting it on
himself. "Just let her sleep," he told di Vino. "She won't know a thing
in the morning."

Di Vino narrowed his eyes. "What did they do to her? If--"

"_If_, nothing," Newhouse snapped. "We got you out of a jam. We hope.
Now just relax and take it easy. See you in a while." He climbed out
the window again. He grinned to himself as he went crabwise across the
face of the wall. Di Vino thought he knew what had happened, and di
Vino was dead wrong. He couldn't have been further off base.

The Captain and her entourage departed the next morning amid a gush of
good wishes and a show of pageantry, with an invitation to return at
a later date. They got into the cars and went back into the jungle,
headed for Dynak Base. Newhouse reported to Colonel Hastings and told
him nothing except that he had made a "preliminary survey" of the
situation at Oassi. If his plan didn't work, Newhouse didn't want
Hastings looking smug.

Then Lieutenant Newhouse just sat around, looking as though he were
thinking hard, while one day after another trudged its weary way into
eternity.

One fine day, he went with the food car again, and when he returned, he
had Boccaccio di Vino with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I still don't see what made them let you go, di Vino," the colonel
said with puzzled anger.

"Frankly, I'm not sure what happened, myself," Boccaccio admitted. He
turned toward Newhouse, and there was anger in his eyes. "But I think
Lieutenant Newhouse can explain."

Newhouse said: "What's the matter, di Vino? You still in love with that
girl?"

"Well--" Di Vino paused, and an odd look came into his eyes. "Well I
guess I am--in a way. Not that I'd go back; I'm not the right man for
her at all. But--well--she was a good kid. And--" The anger came back.
"--and what you had done to her would have gotten you hanged if you'd
done it back on Earth."

Bruce MacAuliffe, di Vino's immediate superior, was also standing
beside Colonel Hastings' desk. "What did he do di Vino?"

"He got Oanella pregnant!" di Vino said. "Or, well, _he_ didn't. But he
had someone else do it. And while she was unconscious, too! Probably
got one of the local savages to--"

"I did no such thing," Newhouse interrupted mildly. "I--"

"Now, just a minute," Colonel Hastings interrupted. "You said that she
got pregnant, di Vino. You mean that she laid a fertile egg?"

"Yes. I mean, well, no, not exactly. She produced _four_ fertile eggs.
Which is pretty darned unusual. Her mother and father got all excited.
The Shanni was all a dither, and her consort was getting so nervous
he went into a fit of the shakes. You should have seen that old gal
running around like a scalded cat. And you should have been there when
the fit hit the Shann. It's the first time any Oassi female has ever
produced four fertile eggs at once." He looked at Newhouse again. "Just
what did you do?"

"Yes," said Colonel Hastings heavily. "I think we all deserve an
explanation."

"The biotechnicians would be able to tell you better than I, sir,"
Newhouse said. "They're writing up a report on it. It's a simple
process, in effect, but a very delicate one.

"We simply had to wait until the single ovum the Shannil was carrying
had arrived at the proper stage of development--something the biotechs
had found out in checking on the local savages. They removed the
unfertilized ovum and put it through two different processes. First,
they self-fertilized it. When an ovum is formed by splitting of the
parent cell, the egg itself retains half the chromosomes, while the
other half are thrown off in what is called a polar body. The boys
simply used the polar body to fertilize the egg. Then they waited until
the fertile ovum divided the first time and separated the cells; when
the second division occurred, the cells were separated again, giving
them four. These were replaced, and in due time, the Shannil produced
four fully developed eggs. And they'll all hatch females; it's possible
to tell by the shape of the rubbery shell whether an egg will be a male
or female, so the Shanni was happy as a lark. The girls, of course,
will be exact genetic duplicates of their mother--who is also their
father, although she doesn't know it. Still--" He grinned. "--there's
an old saying: 'If you want a job done right, do it yourself.'"


                                THE END





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRICE OF EGGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


