The Project Gutenberg eBook of The ordeal of Lancelot Biggs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The ordeal of Lancelot Biggs

Author: Nelson S. Bond

Release date: July 26, 2024 [eBook #74132]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORDEAL OF LANCELOT BIGGS ***





                     The Ordeal of Lancelot Biggs

                           By NELSON S. BOND

            In spite of peace pacts, Earth ships were being
           attacked on Themis. Could Biggs answer that one?

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Amazing Stories May 1943.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Well, like it says in the old adage, "Things equal to the same thing
gather no moss."

When the Corporation that under-pays us snatched the _Saturn_ off
the freight shuttle and turned it into a trouble-shooter for special
assignments, we thought we were getting a break. Huh! We were. "Break"
is just another word for "bust." The result of our alleged "promotion"
was that for a fractional increase in salary we worked twice as hard at
jobs ten times nastier than any we had ever tackled before.

Like for instance the night Cap Hanson and I--I'm Bert Donovan,
bug-pounder of the _Saturn_--were at the home of Lt. and Mrs. Lancelot
Biggs. Biggs is, of course, the First Mate of our void-mangling jalopy.
A year ago he married the skipper's daughter, Diane.

We were sitting around, chatting about this and that and the other
inconsequential truffle, trying to look calmer than we actually felt,
when the telephone jangled. "Bet it's a wrong number!" I said--and
picked it up.

I was right. It _was_ a Wrong Number named Cheeverly, Assignment Clerk
at Long Island Spaceport. He said, "_Salujo_, Sparks. Is Captain Hanson
there?"

"Present," I said, "but not accountable for. Listen, Dracula, how about
calling back tomorrow or next month?"

He snapped, "This is official business, Donovan! Put him on before I
report you!"

So I handed the receiver to the Old Man, and for the next few minutes
Diane and Lanse and I eavesdropped upon one of those unintelligible
half conversations between Hanson and the drip at the other end of the
wire.

"Yeah?" said the Old Man. "Yeah, this is Hanson.... Eh? Eh, what's
that?... But Cheeverly, I.... What?... But I'm on furlough, man! The
staff and crew of the _Saturn_ were granted a three week vaca.... Oh!
Oh, I see! Emergency, eh? Well, if we _have_ to. But can't you find
some other ship to.... Mmm-hmmm! I understand. Yes. Yes. Very well.
I'll get in touch with my men immediately...."

He hung up and turned to us gravely. I think we all knew what he was
going to say before he said it. Diane cried, "Oh, _no_, Daddy! No! Not
_now_!" And Biggs asked, "What is it, sir? I hope they don't want us
to--?"

Hanson fumed, "They do, dingbust 'em to Hades! It's an emergency
mission. We're to lift gravs immediately!"

"Lift gravs!" exclaimed Biggs bleakly. His lump of a larynx leaped like
a lemon in his scrawny neck. "But, Dad! I can't go _now_!"

His jaw sagged to his wishbone, making him homelier than usual. And,
brother, that's saying something! Lancelot Biggs is a lot of things.
He's a genius, for one, and he's slightly whacky, for another. Also
he's one of the grandest friends a guy ever had. But even his doting
mother could not honestly call him good looking.

       *       *       *       *       *

He's about as tall as an old-fashioned hatrack, and built along the
same general lines. He's got more bumps and knobs on his gangling frame
than a hyperthyroid cucumber. Of these assorted protuberances, the
most prominent is an Adam's-apple which bulges from his throat like a
half-swallowed egg, and jiggles up and down when he's excited like a
jitter-bug on an innerspring mattress.

He was excited now, and said voice-box was cavorting horribly from N to
S and return in non-stop flight.

"I can't go _now_!" he repeated starkly. "Not _now_, of all times,
Dad--"

Hanson shook his head regretfully.

"It ain't a case of can or can't, Lancelot. It's a case of _got_ to.
There's trouble on Themis again."

I said, "Themis--again! You mean another ship--?"

"That's right," nodded the skipper. "Attacked and smashed to
smithereens. Not a man left alive. Yes."

"But that's impossible!" I cried. "Only last month the S.S.P. announced
that a peace pact had been signed with the Thagwar of Themis. The
natives of that satellite agreed to join the Solar Union--"

"Them Themisites," growled the Old Man, "keep their pledges about as
good as them Japanese you read about in the hist'ry books. The little
yellow squirts the United Nations had to wipe out a couple hundred
years ago. This makes the sixth time the Thagwar has signed a peace
pact. And it's the sixth time he's broke it. So--"

"So," I said, "we're elected, eh?"

"That's the ticket."

Lanse Biggs' jaw tightened. He said stiffly, "I'm afraid this is one
time I shall not be able to obey orders, sir. I--I can't go with you!"

My heart did a flipflop. I understood, and heartily sympathized with
Biggs. He wanted to be on Earth right now. Because--well, like a
professional grape-farmer, he had raisins of his own.

But I knew what his outright refusal meant. The IPC is a hardboiled
corporation. When it issues an order, it expects obedience--or else.
If Lanse refused to make this expedition, he would not only lose his
rating and his chance to go up for Master's papers--an examination he
was planning to take in the very near future--he might also lose his
job!

Furthermore--and if this sounds selfish, pardon my sullen accent!--I
hated to think of making a truly dangerous trip without Lieutenant
Biggs on the bridge. That brilliant wingding has pulled so many bunnies
out of the derby, saving our individual and collective necks with such
monotonous regularity, that we'd be utterly lost without his assistance.

But I said nothing. After all, this was a question Biggs must decide
for himself.

As it turned out, though, it was not I, nor the Old Man, nor Lancelot,
who solved the problem. It was Mrs. Biggs. In a calm, decisive voice
she said, "But, Lanse, dear--such commotion! Of course you will go!"

"What!" blurted Lanse. "And leave you? Never!"

"Stuff," sniffed Diane, "and nonsense! Stop talking like a cheap play.
What earthly good are you doing here? Not a bit! But out _there_, men
have died ... betrayed by a race of scoundrels. Brave men. Spacemen
like yourself. Your duty is plain. You must go. You have no choice."

"B-but--" protested Lanse.

"But," interrupted Diane, "nothing! Now, I'm tired. You boys run along
and clean up this little job. I'll be here at home, waiting for you."

Biggs asked apprehensively, "And--and you'll be all right while we're
gone? You're sure--"

"Certainly I'll be all right," declared Diane. "Now, lift gravs,
sailors! And--good luck!"

       *       *       *       *       *

So we went. It was one hell of a job collecting the _Saturn's_ crew.
Some of them were miles away, several of them were--well, let's be
charitable and say, "unshipshape"--and _all_ of them were madder than
an alizarin dye at having their leaves cancelled.

But none of them were foolhardy enough to refuse the order. So, to make
a long story less so, several hours later the _Saturn_ roared from its
mooring cradle, all jets blasting. And we were off to Themis.

Well, the planet Saturn is approximately nine hundred million miles
from the Sun, and (since it was currently on our side of that central
beacon) about 800,000,000 from Earth. In the good old days B.B.--Before
Biggs--that would have meant a voyage of weeks. But since our ship was
equipped with Lancelot's invention, the V-I (or "velocity-intensifier")
unit, which enables spacecraft to attain speeds limited only by the
critical velocity of light, we could expect to reach our destination in
a trifle more than ten hours.

To forestall cracks from Earthlubber mathematicians who point out
that 186,000 x 60 x 60 would give us a cruising speed of almost seven
hundred million _m.p.h._, let me explain that you have to let the
hypatomics warm for about five hours before you can cut in the V-I
unit. Then the unit has to be switched off at least an hour before you
reach your objective so you can decelerate without breaking every bone
in your head.

Thus we had a ten hour trip ahead of us. So, as the _Saturn_ jogged
along outward into space, I sat back and tried to remember everything
I'd ever heard about Themis.

It wasn't much. I knew that in 1905, Pickering, the discoverer of
Phoebe, had first spotted Saturn's tenth satellite. He had named this
tiny body Themis, after the goddess of Law and Order. Which, in view of
later events, was a huge and mirthless horselaugh.

Then something queer happened. Themis--disappeared! Yeah, that's right.
It got lost! Can you imagine "losing" a cosmic body about 300 miles
in diameter? Well, that's exactly what the astronomers of the Bloody
Twentieth Century did.

According to their record books, they hunted for it time and time
again, but never relocated it. Finally they decided astronomer
Pickering must have been sopping up too much _spiritus frumenti_ the
night he discovered the satellite, and they expunged its name from the
records.

Which was, of course, a terrific boner ... because it was there all
the time! It was rediscovered in 1983 by the staff observers of the
Goddard Memorial Telescope located in Copernicus Crater on Luna. And
in 2031 A.D. it was visited, charted, and claimed in the name of
the Interplanetary Union by the Space Patrol rocket _Orestes_ on a
settlement investigation flight. Only nobody went to live there.

       *       *       *       *       *

For one thing, it was too small pickings to bother with. During the
Space Rush of 2030-80, everybody who could beg, borrow or steal a ride
on a ship was hightailing it to the more important planets. Venus,
Mars, Mercury, the asteroids. Later, the Jovian satellites became
popular. Slowly the frontiers pushed farther and farther out from Sol.
Until now adventurers were willing to take a squint at any body in
space which boasted soil, air, and a modicum of gravity.

So at last, after long years of ignoring them, Earthmen were trying to
become palsy-walsy with the Themisites. Oh, yes, Themis had natives.
Humanoid aboriginals, not terribly unlike Earth's own children, except
that they had four legs instead of two.

But our side wasn't getting anywhere, and in a rush! As the Old Man
had said, six times a Patrol party had landed on Themis, and six times
signed a peace pact with the ruler, or Thagwar, of that globe. But each
time the pact had been ignored by the Themisites as soon as a party of
colonists attempted to land. The defenseless cruise-ships had been set
upon, destroyed, their cargoes stolen, and their passengers brutally
slaughtered!

So now here we were, blithely barging in where sensible angels might
justifiably hesitate to tread. It didn't make sense. I asked the
skipper about it.

"Look, Cap," I demanded, "maybe I'm sort of slow on the intake, but
how come _we_ draw this assignment? Since the Themisites seem to want
trouble, how come the Space Patrol doesn't go busting out there with
rotors primed and a couple battalions to occupy the world?"

"On account," explained Hanson impatiently, "Themis is populated by
a race with an intelligence quotient of more than .7 on the Solar
Constant scale, Sparks. And also because the race has a recognized
form of government.

"Accordin' to interplanetary law, colonization of civilized bodies can
only be carried out with the permission of the native inhabitants,
and aggressive occupation is forbidden when those inhabitants possess
humanoid intelligence."

"Meaning," I asked, "what? We aren't allowed to grab Themis unless the
Themisites let us?"

"Meanin'," snorted the Old Man, "that if you was the only inhabitant of
Themis, the S.S.P. wouldn't have nothin' to worry about. But the hell
with that. I didn't come here to bandage words with you. I come up to
ask you if you happened to notice the funny way Lanse is actin'."

I had. I nodded sombrely.

"Moping around," I acknowledged, "like a biddie on a china egg. But you
can't expect anything different, Skipper. After all, he didn't want to
leave Diane at a time like this."

"Of course not. Neither did I. But since we had to, we might as well
buckle down and get the job tooken care of as quick as possible.
Anyway, you're keepin' in touch with home, ain't you?"

"Absolutely. Holding an open circuit every minute. But don't worry
about Biggs, Skipper. He'll be all right as soon as we actually get to
work."

       *       *       *       *       *

That's as far as I got with my Pollyanna glad-talk. For at that moment
the intercommunicating system rasped into life, and in the reflector
appeared the baffled pan of Dick Todd, our Second Mate. Dick was so
nervous he had to lick his lips three times before he could grease out
a word. At last:

"S-s-skipper!" he managed.

"Yeah? What is it?"

"Th-th-themis! We're pulling into Themis--"

The Old Man glanced at his chronometer and nodded.

"O.Q. So we're dropping gravs on schedule? So?"

"N-n-nothing," gulped Todd, "except that Themis has d-d-disappeared!
The automatic alarm system is going crazy. According to it, there's a
large cosmic body right in front of _us--but we can't see a thing_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I said, "Oh-oh!" and groped for my transmitter key. But before I could
start pounding the bug, Hanson grabbed my wrist.

"And just what do you think _you're_ doing, Sparks?"

"I don't _think_," I told him, "I _know_! When people see things that
aren't there, I know what to do. Hide the bottle. But when they start
_not_ seeing things that _are_ there, that's all, folks! I'm calling
the S.S.P. base on Luna and asking them to rush a hospital ship out
this way, immediately if not sooner. A nice, pretty hospital ship
equipped with soft, hemstitched straitjackets--"

"Don't be a dope," roared the Old Man. "Todd don't talk nonsense for no
good reason. There's something screwy goin' on around here. I want to
know what it is. Come on!"

And he galloped from my turret like a bolt of goosed lightning, hauling
me along in his wake by sheer suction. We hightailed it through the
corridors, up the ramp, and onto the bridge. There we found both Todd
and Biggs. Todd was still a delicate shade of bilious green, but he was
hunched over the plot table, scribbling hurried calculations. Biggs was
in the pilot's bucket seat, punching away at the studs as cheerfully as
if this were a routine test flight in home atmo.

He glanced around as we came in, and his eyes popped out on stalks. He
half rose from his seat.

"A--a message, Sparks?" he quavered.

I shook my head.

"No word yet," I reassured him. "I'll let you know. Meanwhile, what's
the trouble around here?"

"Trouble?" repeated Lancelot wonderingly.

The Old Man groaned and pawed at what little remains of his hair.

"Don't look now," he rasped, "but didn't Todd call me a couple of
minutes ago with some wild-and-woolly tale about Themis disappearing?"

"Oh--_that_!" smiled Biggs gently. "I thought for a second you
meant there was something wrong. Why, yes, Dad. Themis _has_
disappeared--temporarily. Oddest thing--"

"Talk sense!" I moaned. "Todd said something about there being a large
body in our path, too. Did it--" I took a look at the central vision
plate which reflected nothing between us and the far stars--"did it go
away?"

"Oh, no," drawled Biggs nonchalantly. "It's still there."

"Still there!" I looked again, more closely, at the vision plate. It
was as bare as a debutante's backbone at a ball. "What's still _where_,
Lanse? Have you gone off your gravs, or are my optics myopic?"

"The large body," said Biggs blandly. "It's Themis' moon. It's there.
Three points to starboard, and one degree to loft."

"Themis' _moon_!" croaked the Old Man. "What in Hades are you talkin'
about, Lancelot! Themis _is_ a moon!"

"I know," agreed Biggs. His larynx bobbled pleasantly. "That's the
curious part of it. This is the first time in the solar system that
any satellite has ever been found to have a satellite of its own!
But we've located it, charted its trajectory, and cross-checked our
calculations--haven't we, Dick?"

Todd looked up from the plot table.

"That's right," he said hollowly. "Themis _has_ got a moon of its own.
An--an invisible moon!"

"_Invisible moon!_" The skipper and I did a twin act.

"Yes," said Biggs. "You know, I believe that's why
Themis--er--'disappears' periodically. It is circled by a large, opaque
satellite with the peculiar property of being able to bend light waves
around itself. Consequently, every time the moon, revolving around its
primary, comes between Themis and observers, Themis is occulted--and
disappears!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Old Man looked at him like he had just grown a second head.

"B-but that's impossible, son!" he gasped.

"Oh, no," said Lanse quietly. "Unlikely, yes. But not impossible.
Because--well, because the situation _does_ exist, you see." He clucked
thoughtfully. "Strange, isn't it, that we should be the first to find
it out? After these many years. But that's the Laws of Chance for you.
Every other time a ship visited Themis, the invisible moon must have
been on the far side."

Hanson was fidgeting like he had wasps in his weskit. Now he broke in,
"That's all very interestin'! But how about the chances of our crackin'
up on this aforesaid moon-of-a-moon?"

"Oh," replied Biggs negligently, "that's all taken care of. We've
plotted a new trajectory around it. We should see Themis again in a
moment--Aaah!" He breathed a sigh of satisfaction. "There she is! Nice
looking little satellite, isn't it!"

And true enough, Themis was beginning to appear in the vision plate
before us. A weird looking sight it was. A thin sliver of terrain at
first ... then widening, growing into a full sized cosmic body as it
stopped being occulted by its phenomenal little companion.

Biggs punched the intercommunicating stud and spoke to the engine room.

"All right, Mac," he called. "You can cut the V-I. Prepare to land in
about fifty minutes." Then he turned to us again. "Remarkable thing,
what? Some day when we're not so busy we'll have to drop jets on that
invisible moon, eh? Should be an interesting visit to make."

The skipper groaned feebly.

"Interestin'! He finds an invisible moon, figures a trajectory around
it, then says it's--Oooh! Let me out of here! I'm feelin' heat-waves!"

I grinned at him consolingly.

"Cheer up," I told him. "I know just how you feel. Only it's not the
heat ... it's the humility."

So that was that. The next hour was taken up with routine stuff.
Decelerating to atmo velocity, cruising over Themis until we located
the capital city of Kraalbur, where the Thagwar maintained his royal
residence, dropping to a stern-jet landing ... that was all child's
play for a spaceman like Lt. Lancelot Biggs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it was that a short while later, armed to the teeth and ready for
any eventuality, our foray party of ten men stood in the lock of the
_Saturn_, listening to Hanson's final instructions.

"Be quiet," he advised us, "be calm ... but above all, be careful.
These Themisites is as untrustworthy as three-of-a-kind in a gamblin'
joint. Our orders is to improve relations, not make 'em worse ... so
act accordin'ly. We'll treat them exactly like they meet us. If they
greet us friendly, we'll be nice. But if they get tough--"

"Well?" asked one of the crew.

"Give 'em the works!" said the Old Man succinctly, and nodded to his
son-in-law. "O.Q., Lanse. Open up!"

The airlock wheezed asthmatically, and we stepped out upon the soil of
the satellite Themis.

A huge mob of natives had gathered around to greet us. They were a
weird looking outfit. Sort of like men on horses, you might say, or
like those old Centaurs you read about in mythology books. Maybe that's
where the legend of Centaurs originated; I don't know. The more man
travels the spaceways, the more he discovers races of beings similar
to the freaks and curiosities recorded in ancient myths. Lanse Biggs
believes that once upon a time, thousands of years ago, before Earth's
old moon crashed, destroying the civilization then existent, Man knew
the secret of spacetravel, and legend is a record of things once seen
and known. But I wouldn't know about that. I'm just a radioman....

Anyhow, these Themisites were sort of like us down to the tummy. But
from there on they branched out into the equine family, being endowed
with strong, muscular, quadrupedal bodies and postscripted with long,
bushy tails.

But they were intelligent. No doubt about that. And surprisingly
enough, they seemed friendly! One, their ruler, trotted forward and
raised an arm in the cosmoswide gesture of greeting. He addressed us in
Universale, the common language of space.

"_Salujo, amiji!_" he said. "Welcome to Themis, land of peace and
brotherly love!"

Hanson gasped, "Get a load of that! Three days ago the four-legged
punks murdered a whole crew of Earthmen, and now they yap about
brotherly--"

"Maybe he's right?" I suggested thoughtfully. "You ever have a brother,
Skipper?"

"Shhh!" whispered Biggs. He stepped forward, acting as spokesman for
our team. "Greetings, O Thagwar of Themis! We come as emissaries from
the Blue World, seeking to forge a bond of friendship between your
people and ours."

"Friendship and peace," said the Thagwar grandiloquently, "are ever the
desire of my race."

Lanse said, "We hear and believe, noble Thagwar. But evil tidings have
lately reached our ears. It is told that a few days ago you led your
people in mortal combat against a party from our planet--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Thagwar drew himself stiffly erect and shook his head in firm
denial.

"That," he said in a tone of outraged dignity, "is not so! It was the
_old_ Thagwar who led that brutal assault."

"Old Thagwar? Then you have overthrown his government since--?"

"The former Thagwar," informed the Themisite leader, "has been removed
from power. _I_ am now Thagwar of Themis. I wish only friendship and
peace between our peoples. And now," his eyes rolled hopefully, "have
you brought the usual--er--tributes?"

"Tributes," of course, meant graft. Humanoid forms change with the
planets, but human nature doesn't. However, we had come prepared,
knowing the mentalities of our opponents. Lanse beckoned to a pair of
our crewmen who lugged forward a crate packed with an assortment of
the doolallies and thingamajiggers loved by abos like the Themisites.
Mirrors, gaudy bits of costume jewelry, brightly-colored trinkets,
yards of richly hued cloth, horn-rimmed spectacles, cheap cameras ...
all that sort of thing.

Crooked? Sure. Taking advantage of ignorant savages? Posilutely.
But, hell, you can't interest uncultured aborigines in vanRensselaer
atomo-converters and pre-Rooseveltian Era art treasures. Of course
they'd be glad to get their paws on a few Haemholtz ray-pistols or a
case of three-star _tekel_, but the authorities frown on the practice
of supplying lower races with firearms, fireworks or firewater.

So Lanse handed out the gadgets to the Thagwar, who beamed with
delight. And after that the negotiations were a snapperoo. We told what
we wanted: permission for Earth's colonists to settle on Themis, the
right to construct spaceports, and so on and so forth ... and the ruler
said, "Yes ... yes ... yes," till he sounded like a phonograph needle
caught in a worn groove.

There remained but one thing to be done. The formal signing of the
treaty. So Lanse drew from his pocket the previously prepared sheets,
and was just getting ready to help the Thagwar scrawl a legal "X" on
the dotted line when a stir passed through the assemblage.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a nervousness, a jitteriness, you could _feel_! Heads craned
upward to look at the sky, hooves pawed restlessly at the turf. And
one by one, the centaurlike denizens of Themis began drifting away,
cantering back toward the cluster of hovels which was their capital
city.

Even the Thagwar seemed hesitant, uncertain. For a few minutes he tried
to carry on like a bold, brave monarch. Then with a little whimper that
sounded almost like a whinny, he picked up his bundle of loot and
galloped away, too.

Cap Hanson's jaw dropped like a wildcat stock in a bear market.

"Well, I'll be!" he choked. "Now what?"

But Biggs had been studying the sky. Now he frowned.

"Night," he said.

"Eh?"

"Night," repeated Lanse, "or what passes for night on this peculiar
little satellite. You see, Themis doesn't revolve on its axis,
therefore it has no night or daytime as we on Earth know those periods.
And, of course, since it travels about its primary so swiftly, and
since Saturn itself emits so strong a _gegenschein_, occultation by the
mother planet doesn't create perfect darkness.

"But Themis' invisible little companion swings about Themis. And
whenever it comes between this world and the Sun a dark period ensues.
I should judge we are about to experience one right now. Yes--see? It
is beginning to get dark."

"You mean," stormed Hanson, "everything's called off on account of
darkness? The pact ain't goin' to be signed?"

"Apparently not," admitted Lanse ruefully. "Almost all aboriginal races
have a deep dread of darkness, you know. Well--"

He shrugged--"there's no sense in our waiting out here until the
'night' period ends. We might as well go back to the ship and be
comfortable."

So we did.

Fortunately, the phony "night" didn't last long. Fortunately for me, I
mean. Because as soon as we got to the ship, Lanse pranced along with
me up to the radio turret, and there pestered the living bejabbers out
of me to try to get some word from Earth. But that was strictly no go.
My audio was humming like a tenor in a tepid shower. Static galore.

But at last the invisible barrier cutting us off from Sol's light
slipped away, and once again we marched out onto the soil of Themis.

Marched out? Huh! This time we sauntered out. We were feeling very
carefree and confident, you see, that everything was hunky-dory. Why
not? We had been on the verge of signing the new peace pact when
darkness interrupted us....

That blind, trusting confidence almost cost us our lives! The
Themisites were again gathered around our ship. But when we stepped
from the airlock--we stepped out into a hail of lethal fury!

[Illustration: We stepped out of the ship--right into a hail of rocks!]

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a good break for us that the Themisites had no modern weapons.
A couple of Haemholtz pistols in the paws of capable users, or even
one .54 millimetre rotor, and yours truly wouldn't be here to chronicle
the ensuing events.

But the four-legged scoundrels' armaments were fortunately on the
barbaric side. Stones and cudgels, crudely forged spears, incompetently
carven bows and arrows that were as inaccurate as a real estate agent's
descriptions ... these were the weapons with which we were assailed.

Cap Hanson caught a nice sized chunk of rock amidships, and one of the
crewmen had his shoulder opened up by a wobbling spear, but those were
our only casualties. Above the hub-bub and furore--the Themisites were
howling like a mob of unleashed demons--Lanse cried, "_Back into the
ship, quickly!_"

Which was a command requiring no repeat performance. For the next
three seconds the airlock port looked like Bargain Day at the Girdle
Counter. Then we were all inside once more, safe at home but sore as a
student equestrian's coccyx.

The Old Man bellowed, "Unlatch the rotors! Treacherous villains, I'll
learn 'em to attack Earthmen! We'll blast them clean off the face of
their nasty, sneakin' little globe, the good-for-nothin' horses--"

But Lanse said, "No, Dad--please! Wait a while!"

"Wait? What for?"

"There's something distinctly unusual about this," pondered Lancelot
gravely. "A few hours ago they were friendly; now they are screaming
for our blood. I don't understand it. But you know my motto: '_Get the
theory first!_' If I can learn _why_ they changed so abruptly--"

"What difference does it make why they changed? They did, didn't they?
That's all that counts--"

"No, Dad. The important thing is not to overwhelm the Themisites, beat
them into submission. It is to settle our differences for all time,
establish an enduring peace--" He turned to me--"Sparks, get on the
wire, will you? I want a complete report from Earth on the previous
peace treaties signed with Themis. Who signed them ... when ... under
what circumstances ... everything we can learn."

"O.Q.," I said. "It's your business. But my money bets on the Skipper's
plan. 'Civilize 'em with a gun' is _my_ motto."

Biggs shook his ungainly head disapprovingly.

"That form of reasoning," he declared, "died with the dictatorships.
Now, get on the key, Sparks. And, oh--while you're at it, see if
there's any news from Diane, will you?"

He was a very anxious looking gent. And no wonder.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, after that tempus fidgeted, as it has a habit of doing, the
static had cleared, and I established contact with Joe Marlowe at Lunar
III. He said he'd try to scare up the info I wanted, but it might
take time. I told him to go ahead; I had more time on my hands than a
professional watch repairer. So we dillied and dallied, and after a
while back he came, loaded with more facts than Mr. Britannica put in
his encyclopedia.

The Themis situation, it seemed, was plenty complex. The first peace
pact had been signed eight months ago between the Thagwar of Themis and
the Solar Space Cruiser, _Ajax_, Col. A. R. Prentiss commanding. Swell!
Only two weeks later the Themisites had murdered in cold blood an agent
sent there by the Cosmic Corporation to set up a trading post!

The S.S.P. had sent a second expedition. This party reported hostile
reception. Then, after a whole day wasted in attempting to get in touch
with the Thagwar, the Themisites had suddenly turned friendly--and
signed a second treaty.

This one had lasted exactly four days. It was busted when the
quadrupeds dittoed the craniums of a party of miners who dropped gravs
for fresh water supplies!

Why go on? Expeditions Three, Four, Five and Six had all followed the
same pattern ... an agreeable understanding followed by a swift kick in
the nose. Our experience was no novelty; we were just number Seven on
the Themisite hit-and-run parade.

"In view of the circumstances," Joe Marlowe wound up his report, "the
authorities here suggest that Captain Hanson get the situation in hand
and get the situation in hand and get the situation in hand and get the
situation--"

I cut in on him--but quick!

"Hold everything!" I shot back. "Let's play like he now has the
situation in hand. What happens next?"

"Let him contact the Thagwar of Themis," bugged Marlowe, "and contact
the Thagwar of Themis and contact the Thagwar of Themis and contact--"

Biggs was in the turret with me. He can read code almost as well as I
can. He stared at me curiously.

"What's the matter, Sparks?"

"Don't ask me," I retorted. "I only work here. It sounds like Marlowe's
developed a bad case of digital hiccups! Oh, well, we've got the
information we wanted, anyhow. I'll sign off." So I did.

Biggs asked, "And--and Diane?"

"No word yet. Joe will let us know. The circuit's still open. Well,
you've heard the report. What do you make of it?"

Biggs said slowly, "I don't know, Sparks. It's very peculiar. I'll have
to think it over--_Yes? What is it?_"

He spoke this last to the wall audio which had come to life. Cap Hanson
answered from the bridge.

"Lanse, are you there, son? Listen, come up to the bridge right away,
will you?"

Swift apprehension tightened Biggs' features.

"What's the matter? The Themisites getting violent? They're not
attacking the ship?"

Hanson groaned like the guest artist at a seance.

"Just the opposite! Another of them phony 'nights' has passed outside
since you two've been fiddlin' around up there. Now it's daylight
again ... and there's a mob of Themisites gathered around outside ...
_wavin' banners and peltin' the_ Saturn _with flowers_! The Thagwar has
just sent a messenger biddin' us friendly welcome to Themis!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Great growling guttersnipes!" I spluttered, "What's this all about?
One minute they want to kill and boo ... the next they want to bill and
coo! Why don't they make up their minds?"

"Probably," decided the skipper, "because they ain't got none. Lanse--?"

"We can't learn anything," said Biggs quietly, "in here. Let's go
outside."

So for the third time in as many Themisian 'days', out we pranced, to
be greeted by such hooraw and ballyhoo as you never saw. Those same
centaurs who, a few short Earthly hours ago had been aiming lethal
presents at our kissers were now aiming kisses at our presence! Their
leader pranced forward gracefully and made a low bow before Cap Hanson.

"Greetings, Oh child of the Blue World!" he intoned. "As Thagwar of
Themis I bid you welcome to our peace-loving little planet--"

"Th-thanks!" said the Old Man, and looked bewildered. "Lanse, son,
suppose you--?"

But Lanse was staring curiously at the speaker. He nudged me and
whispered, "Sparks, study the Thagwar! Do you notice anything ...
well ... _strange_ about him?"

"Sure!" I assented. "He looks like a veterinarian's mistake; is that
what you mean? If it's the color of his eyes you're worrying about,
you'd better ask somebody else. These Themisites all look the same to
me. Like peas from the same pot."

"That's not what I meant," whispered Biggs. "What strikes me as being
odd is that ... remember how proud he was of those ornaments we gave
him before the 'night' period set in? He had himself all decked out
like a Christmas tree. But now look at him! Not a single decoration!"

"Maybe," I suggested, "he's allergic to tin?"

"And on the other hand," mused Biggs, "_that_ Themisite over there is
wearing a bracelet and a brass curtain rod in his nose--"

He was perfectly right. The big boss of Themis was as barren of
trinkets as a Pilgrim father. But standing in the background was one of
his henchmen glittering like gilt on a joy-joint bar! It was whacky.
The Thagwar didn't look to me like the kind of guy--or hoss--who would
donate his "tribute" to a subject.

"There's something fishy about this," I said. "Ask him how come,
Lanse ... just for the halibut."

"I will," said Biggs, and stepped forward to do so. But before he could
pop the question, the Thagwar spoke up.

"Peace," he said hoarsely--no pun intended, pals! Lay down them
bricks!--"Peace between your people and mine. And now--did you bring
the usual tribute?"

"Usual tribute!" repeated the Old Man starkly. "Of course we did! We
give it to you yesterday, you rascally old scoundrel. What's the big
idea of--?"

The Thagwar's eyes darkened, and he pawed the ground fretfully.

"That is a mistake, Earthman! You gave me nothing!"

"Wha-a-at! A whole darn caseful of--"

"You gave me," repeated the Thagwar with increasing ominousness,
"nothing! You offered a few baubles to the _old_ Thagwar, possibly--"

Cap Hanson groaned and turned agonized eyes to his son-in-law. "Ain't
that something, now! Another revolution! Now we got to pay off twice!"

Lanse nodded soberly.

"I suspected something like that. Yes, I'm afraid we must, Dad.
Tomkins ... Splicer...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He called to two of the crew. So we had to do it again. Go through
the same old rigmarole. I'll spare you the details this time, since
they were the same as before. We donated, the Thagwar accepted, then
we started talking peace-terms. The pact was presented, the Thagwar
studied it and this time--fortunately--succeeded in stamping it with
his official O.Q. before Themis' invisible moon brought night again.

So at last our job was accomplished. As we entered the ship, Cap Hanson
was jubilant.

"Thank goodness _that's_ done!" he sighed happily. "And now--back to
Earth! And Diane--"

Biggs' Adam's-apple bobbled convulsively in his lean throat. "I--er--I
think we'd better wait just a little while longer, Dad," he said mildly.

"Wait? What for? We got the peace pact signed."

"I know. But don't forget, that's only the eighth in a long series of
such 'peace pacts.' We'd better stick around a little while and see if
they live up to it."

"Stick around a while! How long?"

Lanse glanced through the quartzite viewpanes and said, "Not long.
Because--see? It's night again."

"Night! What's night got to do with it?"

"That," said Lanse seriously, "is just what _I_ want to know. If I
could only get the theory straight in my mind I might have the answer.
Sparks--" He turned to me--"turn on the telaudio. Let's see if we can't
get some word--"

So I did, but there was nothing cooking. The circuit was as cold as a
divorcee's kiss. And that was bad, because Biggs was growing nervouser
and nervouser by the minute. He wanted to get back to Earth so bad he
could taste it. But that's Biggs for you. Thorough and painstaking if
he undertakes a thing. And he wasn't going to leave Themis until he
knew this situation was completely cleared up.

But at last the darkness outside began to lift, and Cap Hanson fidgeted.

"Well, here's what you were waitin' for, boy. Now what?"

"Now," said Biggs, "we see what happens. Are they coming back from
their city?"

They were. The Themisites were galloping across the plains toward the
_Saturn_ again. They were the romping, roamingest bunch of mavericks I
ever saw. "Yup!" I said.

"And--and their attitude?"

"Friendly, of course!" snorted the skipper. "Why shouldn't they be?
Didn't we just sign a peace treaty with them? Lanse, I don't know
what's ailin' you! You--"

He never finished his denunciation of Biggs. For at that moment
the oncoming Themisites hove within hurling distance--and started
hurling! Only this time it was not, as it had been a short while
before, flowers. This time their expressions of "everlasting peace and
affection" were offered with--_stones, arrows, and spears_!

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, Hanson's roar of rage threatened to lift the top clean off the
control turret.

"Dastards!" he screamed. "Vandals, murderers and things that rhyme
with what I first called 'em! This is all I'm goin' to take from them
four-legged scoundrels. Call up the men, Sparks! Tell 'em to man the
guns! We're goin' to blast them murderin' skunks from here to Kingdom
Come--"

"Wait, Dad!" pleaded Biggs feverishly. "I think I'm beginning to
understand--faintly. If you'll give me just a little more time--"

"Time your Aunt Nellie! I've done all the delayin' I'm goin' to--"

It was at that moment the telaudio, which I had set to vocode any
message which came in on the Luna circuit, began squawking. It was
faint at first, and sort of garbled, with lots of static, but it
cleared as it went along.

"Lieutenant Lancelot Biggs," it called, "aboard the
_Saturn_--congratulations! You are the father of a fine baby boy!"

"B-b-b-boy!" gasped Biggs. His face turned every color in the spectrum,
and a couple that haven't been invented yet. "A--a boy!"

"_Yippee!_" howled the Old Man, his thoughts of vengeance on the
Themisites temporarily forgotten. "A grandson! I'm a grampaw! _Yippee!_"

"Congratulations, Lanse!" I said. "A boy, eh? Swell! Another Biggs in
space, one of these days--"

"S-s-see if you can get Earth, Sparks," chattered Biggs. "F-f-find out
how Diane is."

"Right!" I snapped. "I'll get at it immediately."

I started for the radio room. But before I had taken two steps the
audio began talking again.

"Lieutenant Lancelot Biggs," it called, "aboard the
_Saturn_--congratulations! You are the father of a fine baby boy!"

My face sort of blanched. I turned to Biggs. "Congratulations," I
offered, "again, Lanse! Golly--_two_ boys!"

Hanson demanded, "Whaddya mean, two boys! That's a repeat message, you
dope!"

Lanse smiled sort of feebly.

"I--I'm afraid not, Dad," he said. "If it were a repeat message,
Marlowe would have said, 'Repeat.' Sparks is right. I--I'm the father
of twins!"

"Well, I'll be darned!" ejaculated the Old Man. Then, rallying, "Twins,
eh? Good! That makes me _two_ grampaws, eh? Fine! I'm twice as gla--"

He stopped, his jaw dropping strickenly. For again Joe Marlowe's voice
was rolling through the control turret.

"Lieutenant Lancelot Biggs," it called, "aboard the
_Saturn_--congratulations! You are the father of a fine baby boy--"

"G-g-gracious!" gasped Biggs, and fell into a chair. "_Triplets!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

This time I addressed myself to Hanson. "Congratulations, Skipper," I
said. "Now you're _three_ grampaws. If Diane keeps _this_ up, you'll be
able to man a whole cruiser."

The Old Man's face was fiery.

"Now, hold everything!" he stormed. "This is goin' too far! Diane don't
have to overdo it, just because we're not there! There's such a thing
as--_Triplets_! I won't allow it!"

"What's the matter," I grinned at him, "afraid of the Three Little
Biggs, Skipper. Don't be a big bad wolf!"

But even _I_ didn't think it was funny when, at that moment, Joe
Marlowe's familiar tones rolled through the room _again_.

"Lieutenant Lancelot Biggs," he called, "aboard the
_Saturn_--congratulations! You are the father of a fine baby boy--"

"Gosh!" I gulped. "This is turning into a parade!"

Cap Hanson's face was a study in technicolor. His jowls were dangling
to his third weskit button. But oddly enough, at this third dire
pronouncement, Lancelot Biggs did not even wince. Instead, his eyes
brightened; he rose from the chair into which, a moment before, he had
tumbled.

"No!" he yelled. "Not a parade--a solution!"

"Huh?" I gaped at him. "Solution to what? The unemployment problem?"

"No, Sparks! All our troubles! Quadruplets? No! Triplets? No! Twins?
No, not even that! Just one baby!"

"Y-you mean," I asked him, "that's a repeat message? But, Lanse, you
know as well as I do Joe would have announced it as a repeat--"

"Certainly. But what we're hearing is the same message over and over
again!"

"Huh!" Hanson forced the query, new hope in every wrinkle of his brow.

"Yes. Remember how Marlowe's orders got grooved before, Sparks? Well,
this is some more of the same thing! I know _why_, too. And I _also_
know why we've been having so much trouble with the Themisites!"

"Y-you do? Why?"

"The moon! The invisible moon--that's the answer! Tell me, Sparks--what
sort of things are invisible?"

"Why?" I stammered, "dark things seen against a dark background ...
light things seen against a light background ... objects marked with
protective coloration...."

"And _transparent_ things!" chortled Biggs. "Transparent things with
just sufficient mass to cause refraction of light! That's what Themis'
moon is made of! Pure, unadulterated galena in its natural form is a
colorless, transparent substance, sufficiently opaque to occult Themis,
but also with enough mass to refract normal light rays! And galena is--"

"I get it!" I hollered. "A natural wave-trap for radio transmission.
Back in the early days of the Twentieth Century, galena was the
substance used in the manufacture of experimental so-called 'crystal
sets'!"

"By golly, you're right, Lanse! That satellite is large enough to
capture and retain a record of Joe Marlowe's voice, and as it revolves
it keeps re-transmitting it to us over and over again--"

"Lieutenant Lancelot Biggs," repeated the voice of Marlowe--"aboard the
_Saturn_--congratulations! You are the father of a fine baby boy!"

"--like that!" said Biggs. "Yes! Notice how Joe's voice always catches
a little just before he says 'congratulations'? It's been the same
fault every time."

"O.Q.," broke in the Old Man. "Maybe you're right. You usually are. But
what's that got to do with the way the Themisites keeps changin' their
attitude towards us? Don't tell me they got galena in their veins?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Biggs shook his head firmly.

"No, that's another question entirely. But it can be solved by the same
theory."

"Huh?"

"Twins!" said Biggs. "Or, rather, multiple rulers! Sparks, you said you
couldn't tell the difference between one Themisite and another--"

"That's right."

"Neither can I. Neither can any Earthman. That's why we've been unable
to understand their psychology and--more important still--their form of
government."

"Government!" burst in the Old Man. "Now he talks about government.
What's that got to do with--"

"Why," explained Lancelot, "everything! The Themisites have one of
the rarest forms of self-rule known. But one which early in the Greek
civilization had its counterpart on earth. You see, they are an
_omnigarchy_!"

"A who-ni-whichy?" I choked.

"Omnigarchy! From the Latin base _omni-_, meaning all! You see, on
this world--everyone takes his turn at being Thagwar! Every day a new
Themisite becomes master over his brethren until the next 'night'
period. That is why the Thagwar we signed our pact with today denied
having received any gifts. He told the truth. We had given our tributes
to the Thagwar of the preceding day.

"That is--must be!--also why peace pacts have been broken with such
regularity. Each succeeding Thagwar feels he, being now ruler, is
entitled to a share of the 'spoils' that go with the signing of a
treaty--and being not obligated to uphold the signature of a deposed
Thagwar leads a movement against colonists in an effort to win his
rights. The individual natures of these Thagwars dictates the form of
movement. If the Thagwar is a naturally peace-loving creature he comes
with soft words and flowers; if he is a brutal type, he attempts to
take his tribute by force."

I demanded wildly, "But--but how the dickens are we ever going to
form a permanent treaty with a race that changes rulers once a day?
Especially when a Themisian day is only a couple of Earth hours?"

Biggs shrugged. "That," he declaimed, "is not our problem, but that
of the Interplanetary Union. My private opinion is that, since Themis
has a limited population, the best way to assure peace would be to buy
over every single Themisite. Of course, that means a terrific initial
expenditure, but--"

"But," said the Old Man, "we've done what we was sent here for. We
signed a peace pact--which ain't worth the paper it's printed on--and
we found out why all former treaties was failures. So if you ask me,
the best thing we can do is git out of here before one of them periodic
Thagwars, smarter than the rest, discovers a way to wreck our ship.
What say, son?"

"That," nodded Biggs, "would be my idea, too. Our task is finished;
we'll leave it to the Space Patrolmen to figure out the rest. Come on,
Dad--let's lift gravs for home and Lancelot, Junior!"

"For Lance--!" The Old Man frowned. "Oh, no! No more silly names like
that in our family. That young man's name is gonna be Waldemar--after
me!"

"Lancelot!" said Lancelot stubbornly.

"Waldemar!" said Waldemar Hanson the same way.

"Lancelot!"

"Waldemar!"

       *       *       *       *       *

So we all went home and met Christopher Biggs. Only trouble with those
two shipmates of mine is that they forgot Diane Hanson, who, being the
daughter of Waldemar and the wife of Lancelot, has a stubborn streak of
her own.

Kit Biggs weighed seven pounds and eight ounces. He and his mother
are both doing fine, thanks. Biggs is doing O.Q., too. He's got a new
title now. Around his home, that is. He's First Mate in Charge of the
Three-Cornered Pants Department.

But--what do you expect? After all, life is just one damp thing after
another....


                                THE END





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORDEAL OF LANCELOT BIGGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


