The Project Gutenberg eBook of Beauty and the beast
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Beauty and the beast
        An old tale new-told, with pictures

Illustrator: E. V. B.

Release date: August 18, 2024 [eBook #74277]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Sampson Low, Marston, Low, and Searle

Credits: Alan, Mairi and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ***





[Illustration: ONE COLD MARCH DAY, THE LITTLE MAID RAN DOWN TO THE
OUTER COURT, WITH HER NEW SCARLET CLOAK, TO WRAP HER FRIEND THE OLD
WATCH DOG IN! LEIGHTON, BROS.]




                         BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.


                 _An Old Tale New-Told, with Pictures,
                             By E. V. B._


                                LONDON:

                SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, LOW, AND SEARLE,

                  CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.




                                LONDON:
                 R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS,
                          BREAD STREET HILL.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


 1.--_Once, on a cold March day, the little maid ran down to the outer
 court with her new scarlet cloak, to wrap her friend the old watch-dog
 in!_

 2.--_In the King’s garden the feast is ready and the minstrels wait._

 3.--_The merchant found a little door in the wall, and he opened it
 and went into the Beast’s garden._

 4.--_Upon the strange prickly leaves some one had curiously carved
 Beauty’s name._

 5.--_At dawn, a lady came to comfort her._

 6.--_After supper every night, the Beast asked Beauty to be his wife;
 and every night she said him nay._

 7.--_One sister’s husband, like Narcissus of old, worshipped his own
 beauty: but the other was full of learning._

 8.--_Only the raven in the brake saw the sisters’ rage, and heard them
 plot her death._

 9.--_“Ah, dear Beast!” she said; “alas, that my unkindness should thus
 slay thee!”_

 10.--_Love is the magic that makes all things fair._




[Illustration]

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.


Once, long ago, in a certain city whose name is forgotten, there lived
a merchant-master. He had three sons and three daughters, but his
wife was dead. The man was happy in his children; for the sons were
well-grown and brave, and the daughters beautiful. Men called both
elder maidens passing fair. One, like dusky night, black-haired and
brown-eyed--the other, bright as the morning, with long tresses of
red gold. But the third daughter, born years later, outshone both in
her perfect loveliness. Such a lovely maid was never seen--so they
named her simply, Beauty. No fairy godmother came with gifts to call
her so; but she grew so sweet and lovely, that in the city where she
dwelt they knew her by no other name. Howbeit, many a one said, it
was but her happy, innocent soul that gave the sunshine to her face.
Sometimes it would happen, that one of the great masters in painting
or sculpture of those old times, journeying through that place, and
beholding her pass down the street, would beseech her to stay a while,
that with pencil or with chisel, he might do some image of that
gracious, lovesome mien, to make him glad in after days. And thus, it
may be, Beauty lives still under the dimness of some old canvas--the
St. Catherine or the Virgin Mother of some Holy Family--or smiles
may-be, in the carven face of an angel, in the niche beside some old
cathedral door. Even from the time when she was a little child, Beauty
possessed the gift of a loving heart. And the love she so freely gave,
was paid back to her again in full measure. They who were despised and
ugly, in their wretchedness wanted never a kind word or look from her,
nor were unholpen by her in their need. Most tenderly she loved all
God’s suffering creatures, whether of bird or beast; she took them to
her heart, and made joy to soothe and comfort them. And she withheld
not her small hand from succouring the most ill-favoured of earth’s
children. Self-forgetful, in her large charity, she tended even herbs,
and such unlovely, blossomless, and scentless plants, as might call
for her tender care. And the child would oftentimes fetch water for
some poor neglected weed, fainting in the hot sun, or stay to prop some
weak climbing plant torn down by the rough wind. And Beauty was greatly
beloved; and notwithstanding that she never knew a mother’s love, her
child days went lightly by, and the rose-light of her own sweet joyous
spirit shone back to her from all things round. But as the maiden grew
from infancy into youth, her meek heart was pained by her sisters’
pride and arrogance. Many were the sharp cruel words she heard; many a
hard rebuke must she endure from that ungentle pair. Their pride and
hardness knew no end. Vain were they of their many lovers, of their
gold-embroidered gowns, of their goodly persons; for well they wist
that of all fair women thereabout,--but for their young sister,--they
were held peerless. So they envied Beauty the lovely face that God gave
her, and the love her kindness won for her. Noble youths sought many a
time to gain in marriage one or another of them; but none seemed great
enough, or rich enough. Yet they would not let them go, but with half
smiles and double words, kept the young men following in their train.

[Illustration: “IN THE KING’S GARDEN THE FEAST IS READY, AND THE
MINSTRELS WAIT.” LEIGHTON, BROS.]

Time sped quickly in the rich city where the merchant dwelt. Day and
night the hours danced on to the sound of music and feasting. Beauty’s
sisters reigned like queens amid their young companions,--damsels
nigh as fair as they,--but of whom they made not much account, for the
splendour of the merchant’s daughters cast a cold shadow all around.

On great feast days, when the house was set in order, and the sisters
in their rich apparel, and gold crowns upon their heads, sat under
silken canopies, with all their lovers at their feet, right glad
were they when Beauty sat not with them. At such times the girl, in
the glory of her lustrous loveliness, would call the children, to
come forth into the fields and woods, and gather flowers with her;
or perchance she might steal away to succour in their distress, poor
miserable ones, who lay sick and forlorn of hope, in rude dwellings
beyond the city walls. Then were the sisters left to reign alone; and
no prayer did they ever make to Beauty, for her to share the joyance of
such festal days.

[Illustration]

But that sweet maiden gave no heed at all to such unkindness. She
would seek flowers of rare bloom, and therewith weave garlands and
set them in her sisters’ hair, all unaware that meanwhile sharp stings
of envious hatred stung them, when they marked how men’s faces lit up
with gladness whenever Beauty passed by, clad only in her simple gown.
And so neglect and unkindness did not touch her gentle life. And home
was beyond all things dear to her, for the great love and reverence
she bore her father. Dearer moreover than aught else beside, save
only his gold (which was indeed no hoarded wealth), was the youngest
born to him. Yet the prince-merchant took most delight withal, in his
many-oared galleys and full-sailed ships, which ever and anon went
out across the harbour bar, and in due course came back into port
gold-laden, and heavy with precious merchandise from lands beyond the
sunrise.

[Illustration]

But Fortune is not always kind, and there be many winds both fair and
foul; and black days there be, when the Fates send forth a wind, which
blows no good to any living soul. So fared it with the merchant. For on
a day, watchers upon the high watch-tower, out-worn with long waiting,
and with gazing seawards in vain, heard the clatter of iron shoes upon
the beaten way below. And anon came messengers on swift coursers from
some outland place, who did their message, and cried out to the men
to cease their watch, for that the ships would return no more. They
told how fierce storms had arisen, and had so buffeted the ships that
they drove right upon the rocks; the heavy cargo sank down, and all had
perished in the sea. Thus sorrow and a great heaviness fell upon the
merchant and all his house. The elder daughters slept not, nor ate,
for two days and two nights. No more dreams of pride for them. No more
days of idle joy. Fortune hid her face, and the world hid hers, for it
had come to pass that the rich man, was on a sudden, poor. The suitors
melted away, every one, like ghosts at cockcrow. And not one had said,
“Stay with us; my home is thine.” Beauty, it is true, might abide
in that city, a well-loved, honoured wife; but ruin and unhappiness
had crept up to the door, and, like a deadly snake, enfolded all her
father’s house: and she cared not to live at ease, when they who were
dear to her, might scarce have bread to eat. Her brothers knit their
brows, and spake no word good or bad; only, they laid by in the great
painted chest, their swords, and gay clothing of furred mantles and
plumed caps, and went to toil in the fields.

[Illustration]

Leagues away, on a barren sandy ridge above the sea, in long-past
years, the sea-kings had built them a stronghold. Little of it now had
fire and war and time’s long decay left whole, save one tempest-shaken
tower. And under the tower a village, where dwelt rude fisher folk. A
poor place withal for he who was once a rich lord! A possession that
no man might take much pride in. But thither the ruined merchant now
must wend, to make his abode there, and strive to win some daily bread,
in rough toil with the fishing-boats. So the man with his children
departed, and came to dwell in the tower on the grey hill, amidst of
wretched huts. And what scanty gear they had, was carried on the backs
of one or two hired mules. It was a dark and windy night, the night
when they came there, in the season of the year that leaves first turn
from green to gold, and barley sheaves stand in the fields, and the
vintage is done. The sun had arisen in the morning when Beauty opened
the old brown door and looked out from under its low-browed arch. Far
down, beyond the curving yellow sands, lay a great sea-plain, silver
bright, glittering in changeful lights and colour. Up to the roots of
the far-off white mountains, olive woods clothed all the land with
mists of shimmering grey. Corn-fields lay anear, between long stretches
of purple-shadowed forest. And the girl laughed for gladness of heart,
calling aloud to her sisters to come and behold with her this glorious
new wonderland where Fate had led them. But they, so soon as they came
and stood beside the open door, did but cast one glance down upon those
poverty-stricken huts, below the steep hard by,--then muttering one to
the other, “Better in our graves than here!” they turned away their
faces from God’s earth and sea: and therewith, through sore repining
and complaint, they both fell sick: and on their hard beds made what
cheer they might with empty dreams, and lamentation for the goodly days
that had been.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

In the old homestead on the hill, the year wore on merrily, for Beauty
made great sunshine in that place. Her light step and the music of her
happy voice seemed everywhere--all about the house, in the low dark
rooms and up and down the creaking stair. A glory seemed to shine round
her lovely face when you saw it at the door. Like the wild birds, she
was for ever flitting here and there, and singing as she went. She lent
the young strength of her white arms to the ancient crone who kept the
house. She came wherever she was called. It was Beauty who drew the
water and kneaded the cakes, and led the cows to pasture in the dewy
grass-lands in the morning. It was Beauty who set the table, and made
ready for father and hungry brothers against their return at evening,
from the long day’s work. Right glad and willing was she, to labour
from red dawn to dark, for the love she bore them. And whatever work
she set her hand to, wheresoever she did any service, all things she
touched seemed nobler, since that she had to do with them. But greater
joy she had otherwhile, on the days when she was sent to keep goats
upon the hill. Strong and light of foot herself as a young kid, she
climbed the rugged paths among the rocks, following after her wayward
herd. Many a day would she wander with them through the great woods
till the sun was low. But ever as she went, on the hills under the
blue sky, or through the forest amid the green darkness of noonday,
sea and sky, and sun and shadow, taught the maiden marvellous things.
Many a secret did the wind whisper; many a strange tale her eyes read
in the flowery grass; many a song, for her alone, sang the mountain
stream, hurrying over the stones. And when Beauty led home her flock
at sun-down, after such sweet days as these they noted how, when she
crossed the threshold and came into the dark house-room, her eyes would
shine with a diviner light, than the full health of youth only might
give.

[Illustration]

Days and months went by; till in the second winter, one morning a
weary horseman drew rein at the door. He told that the merchant’s
heaviest-laden ship, one of those long since given up for lost, had on
a sudden sailed into a distant sea-port, and now lay safely anchored in
the bay. Loud were the rejoicings that day within the grey old tower
on the hill. Joy and laughter filled all hearts. The elder sisters
straightway lost themselves in happy day-dreams of a golden coming
time; of a joyous life to be lived once more, when they should return
to the great rich city. They hastened their father’s quick departure
for the ship; but as needs must, their farewells were long, for they
prayed him to bring back to them many a rich thing that their hearts
desired--jewelled coifs, and silken gowns and gold-embroidered stuffs;
stores of perfumed gloves and precious stones; and golden chains, and
strings of pearls. Each sister longed after something better, and of
higher price than the other. So the merchant promised all, and made
ready to be gone. Then Beauty put up her sweet face to bid farewell,
as she stood beside the horse, and held his stirrup for the beloved
father. And he stooped down to kiss her, saying, “And wilt thou nought,
thou best-loved child? Choose only what thing is most rare and longed
for, it is granted.”

[Illustration]

But Beauty whispered, “Bring me a white rose, my father,--a little
white rose!”

And seeing that no words could move her in this, but that she would
have a rose, a white rose, he promised that and rode away.

So in this changing world the evil days for them seemed passed away
for evermore. It was now winter, and when that tide drew near that the
merchant should come home, Beauty’s sisters sat all day in the little
turret window watching; or they went pacing up and down the bare grey
ridge, waiting to behold from afar the long train of laden mules. From
early morning, through the glaring noon-tide, oftentimes till after
moonrise, when long shadows lengthened, still would they keep untiring
watch. Small care indeed had they to see again their father’s face; but
their souls yearned for the gold and the silver and the treasure he
should bring with him.

[Illustration: THE MERCHANT FOUND A LITTLE DOOR IN THE WALL, AND HE
OPENED IT, AND WENT INTO THE BEAST’S GARDEN. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

Alas! the longed-for hour, when at last it came, was in no wise like
the picture that eager greed had held up before their minds’ eye. Bad
luck still clave fast to the ill-starred merchant; or so it seemed;
for when he came anear the wished-for harbour, he saw indeed amidst
crowded masts a little smouldering smoke and flame, and folks running
to and fro upon the quay; but his own good ship with her bales of
costly merchandize, he never saw. That very night, by misadventure,
some spark from the shipmen’s fire had fallen unheeded, and the ship
had burned down to the edge of the cold water. Thus sore smitten, and
in great heaviness, the merchant must wend home again. Poor had he left
it, and poor must he return. Full well might cruel fancy now paint
for him--as wearily, with down-bent head, he turned to fare back the
way that he had come--the grief of such an empty home-coming. “Alas!”
he sighed, as he looked round across the wide wintry plain, “unhappy
that I am! I cannot even take home with me the one little white rose
for Beauty.” And so, very sorrowfully, did he ride on for many a weary
mile, in the rain and the wind. Lost in troubled thought, he forgot
to mark which way his horse might go. On a sudden the creaking sound
of thick branches overhead, with storms of dry dead leaves whirled
past his face, and many a wild sound, as of the great north wind in
winter battling with the strong-limbed forest-trees, aroused him and
recalled him to himself. All around seemed strange, and unlike the
road he knew. Painfully for a time the merchant and his tired beast
made head against the driving blast. The forest path seemed as though
it would never end; the wind blew as though it would never cease.
But at sundown there fell a calm. The dark clouds broke, and in the
clear evening light, the man turned into a way he deemed that he had
gone, once in older times, under shelter of a grey stone wall. On the
right hand, between straight red bolls of tall fir-trees, shone the
far-off open country. The wall closed in upon the left; and above the
mouldering weed-grown coping, from within, rose dark cypress spires
against the sky. Arbutus trees, all a-flame with rich ripe fruit amidst
gold-green leaves, tossed down their scarlet balls upon the wet stony
way below. And withal, from the other side came a great sweetness as
of summer roses upon the air; but a few paces farther on, white roses,
like floods of surging foam, overtopped the high wall. Between the
whiteness of uncounted roses scarce any green at all might show.
Now as the merchant beheld these foam-white flowers, he thought on
Beauty’s simple wish. Then he cast about in his mind how to reach up
to them; and anon he spied a quaintly-painted gateway in the wall, and
a little door set therein. Without more ado he dismounted, and pushing
open the little door, passed through into a fairy garden. Within the
greenness of that enchanted space there was not any more winter. Green
paths overhung by pale-blossomed acacias, led to grassy lawns closed
in by well-clipt hedges of box and rosemary, and broidered all over
with little flowers,--blue, pink, and lilac,--mixt with the short thick
grass. Long narrow terraces rising in green steps one above the other,
set with fruit-trees in full bloom, made lines of lovely colour. Wild
violets crept fragrantly about their roots, or hung in purple draperies
from step to step. Under the shadowy dark-stemmed trees blood-red
lilies burnt with a sultry glow. Here and there, in the blackness of
some deeper gloom, pure star-like flowers, poised on tall slender
stalks, gleamed white and ghostly. But everywhere about that garden,
roses grew and bloomed, scattering their delicate petals upon the
grass. Through the silence came a low murmuring of unseen waters; the
thrush sang hidden amid thick leaves. The man scarce could tell if all
the sweetness of that place were truth, or but woven magic. How this
might be seemed nought to him, so he might pluck a living rose or two
for Beauty. Yet he trod lightly, lest a spell should snap, and the
dream melt away, leaving him alone in some drear bleak waste.

[Illustration]

But as he held the plucked flowers in his hand, a dread of some
nameless unknown thing began to chill the man’s heart. Night seemed
gathering round. The loud birds ceased their music; the merry-voiced
fountains ran dully; and a shuddering dreadful sound, creeping up
a-nigh him, turned all his blood to ice. The heavy dragging rustle
as of some huge beast beneath the trees, became at length a grizzly
shape, on the open green. The man was ’ware of great blackness and
the grating of teeth. What more he could never tell, for betwixt the
strange darkness and his mortal fear, standing there unarmed,--nought
in his right hand but some stolen roses,--sight failed him. Then the
Beast stayed still, and the roses dropt from the man’s grasp; and that
Beast spake in a voice which was terrible to hearken to, so shaken was
it by despair and rage.

“Who, wretched man! art thou, that darest enter here and steal my
roses? Meet were it did I slay thee there where thou standest!”

But now the merchant, in whose breast there beat no woman’s heart, gat
together all his strength and wit. So he turned and faced the Beast.

“That were poorly done, fair sir,” said he, “to slay an unarmed
man--one, too, less mighty than thyself. The child shall yet win
sweeter flowers than these; take back thy roses and let me be gone.”
And he cast down the flowers, and spurned them with his foot.

But the Beast’s wrath on a sudden changed, as with a grievous voice he
groaned, “For whom, then, art thou thus lost?”

[Illustration: UPON THE STRANGE PRICKLY LEAVES, SOME ONE HAD CURIOUSLY
CARVED BEAUTY’S NAME.... THE BEAST CAME NEAR, AND THE ROSES FELL FROM
HIS GRASP. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

Then the man told him all; of his bootless journey to the distant
seaport,--of how his eldest daughters had desired jewels and gold
raiment, and of Beauty’s wish for one white rose.

Silently, the Beast heard; then, drawing a deep breath, like a human
sigh, he spake again very softly. “Merchant,” he said, “death is the
price they pay who steal that without which life to me were one long
death. But if life still to thee is sweet, thou must bring hither
that young maid of whom thou spakest. Half a year will I await her
coming; but if she come not then, in thine own house will I seek her,
and little more joy will life hold then for thee or her. So get thee
gone, and take this rose for Beauty.” With that the Beast brake off
a rose, and thrust it into the merchant’s hand, who, for a moment
stood still, and heard in the glimmering twilight that huge creature
depart, crashing and sliding backward amid the trees. Then the man,
dazed and bewildered, hasted back to the little door in the wall. Hard
by stood the chestnut horse, tied to a tree, watchful and impatient.
On the earth lay a white thin covering of snow, and on the snow the
morning sun shone fair. The horse and his rider made good speed along
the echoing white road, till at the border of the wood the merchant
slacked rein, and there, a little way down the hill before him, he saw
the well-known homestead. The grey ridge and the ancient tower, the
curving shore, and blue sea beyond. And now, slowly pacing down the
steep way, he fell on meditation. Almost he thought within himself,
last night’s strange chance to be a fearsome dream. But the rose in his
hand shot back a terror that no vision, but indeed a dismal fate, had
overtaken him; and that now, joyless and unholpen must he abide. Wild
thoughts beset him: thoughts of the deep broad water and safe haven
on that other side; deadly thoughts to make an end of life and misery
for him and for the child he loved. Yet, as day drew on, Care and Fear
fled. Hope once more danced lightly in the man’s soul, for neither
age nor misfortune had yet quite dulled his cheer; and now, upon the
level road, he joyously spurred on to meet his children waiting at
the door. You may well believe how with bitter and hard words Beauty’s
sisters bemoaned themselves to see their father’s poor return. No long
train of sumpter mules and servants! Only Beauty was glad. She laughed
gently, and made him joy and sweet welcome as he kissed her, putting
the dear-bought rose into her hand. But soon must the bitter tale be
told. So with set white face, and amid choking sobs, the father must
confess how with that hateful vow he had sold his child’s life. But she
embraced him in her arms, and with loving smiles bade him take heart,
and put fear from him; for that although half a year was but a little
space to live, there yet was time for a few happy days, and for hope,
within a while to light upon some escape from misery. As for the three
brothers, they made light of the matter; but when they knew all the
truth, swore great oaths that their sister should not go.

[Illustration]

Days and weeks went quickly by in cloud and sunshine. Each night
the little load of trouble, or it might be peace, that the day had
gathered, slipped away into the Great Storehouse, and was forgotten.
One wretched thought only remained in the darkness and silence to
perplex the hapless merchant with a dull surprise and bewildered dread
of what soon or late must come. As for Beauty, since her father hid
within himself the secret terror that after the busy day was done,
laid wait and beset for him the dark hours, she wasted small care on
aught, but how best to make cheer in their poor house. But ofttimes
would a sharp pain strike athwart the father’s heart, when at evening
he wended home from the fishing or the field. Then, perchance, after
the cliff was climbed, he would look towards Beauty’s casement in the
tower--there, amid bud and blossom, a face would smile down upon him,
fairer than any rose. For in some old earthen pot, that dear-bought
briar had been set, and it had taken root and grown into a goodly
plant. And Beauty tended it well, and loved her blooming rose-tree, and
never a doubt nor fear of any deadly Beast beclouded her strong heart.

[Illustration]

But now, when summer-tide was full, on a blue June day, when his
sons were all away in the fields, the man looked wanly in his young
daughter’s face; and she, well knowing what that was he would say to
her, went and wrapt a grey mantle round her, and set forth with him
to the outward gate. And there she bade farewell to her sisters, who
followed, making some hollow show of false sorrow. Tenderly her father
lifted up the maid and set her upon a lean rough-coated farm horse,
which awaited them, tied to the gate. And then, leading the horse by
the bridle-rein,--as in a dream,--they fared forth together on their
fateful way. Soon the steep path that had wound through barren rocks,
began to cross the sandy plain, and before the sun was high, they had
passed on into a beautiful green world of young corn, all bedashed
with jewelled blooms of blue and scarlet and gold, between the
thin-eared ranks. Loud sang under the white clouds, whole heavenward
companies of the quivering, grey-winged bird. White cottage walls
gleamed under deep thatch, each one in its little close of orchard
or of fragrant walnut-trees. And upon the upland slopes lay many a
fair homestead, half seen amid the crowding of rich corn-stacks. And
so the narrowing way led on to the storm blown pines and thickets of
dwarf oak, which crowned a dark line of hill above. Slowly they toiled
up the height, for the noonday sun shone hotly down; and there under
the shade the twain stayed a while, and undid the little store of
food they had to eat by the way, and let their wearied beast go, in
the scanty grass near by. When long shadows stretched over the land,
they were afoot once more. And now the merchant followed, dumb with
a despair that had no words, while Beauty on her horse went shining
through the wood. Sorrowfully the winds made dole in the leafy boughs
above their heads. And ever as they went the trees grew more thick
together, with black night down within the forest depths. Twisted roots
crawled serpent-wise across the path, and needs must the travellers go
carefully and slow. Night drew on, and the man began to mark the way
with care, and sought through the darkness for the old stone wall, he
thought to be not far from that place. Right so there came to them some
glimmer of moon-litten stone between the trees, anigh the dimness of
their path. And now the long garden wall echoed back the sound of the
iron-shod hoofs. But smooth and without break seemed that length of
ordered stones. And though the man sought painfully, feeling with his
hands where the shadows fell thickest, yet it seemed he might never
find the little door. Many an odorous wave of delicious fragrance came
over from the other side. And in the uncertain light, Beauty perceived
an over-hanging of white roses amidst tangled weeds. And therewithal,
as in a dream strange things do happen with great ease and likelihood,
so whilst yet they sought the entrance, on a sudden they were within
the garden of the Beast. Light seemed to shine from the far end of a
wide grassy way, and onward to that light, must they go. After a few
paces the travellers came anear the lighted windows and open gates of a
large fair manor. Gently her father lifted down Beauty from the horse,
and leaving him to go whither he would, they entered, dazzled with a
great silvery blaze of light. These twain were utterly alone. No sound,
no living creature greeted them there.

So in shivering silence, treading lightly in that marble-pillared
place, where the lightest footstep echoed and rang again, they came
to a marvellous painted hall. Beauty gazed with wonder on the red
rose-leaves that strewed the floor, on the golden hangings and the
festal garlands on the walls, and the banquet spread with care awaiting
them. And because their bodies were faint from weariness and hunger,
they sat them down on the gold-wrought chairs to make what cheer they
might, notwithstanding that their very souls were chilled with dread
of the yet unseen presence. So they ate and drank; and afterwards,
as they still sat there, there seemed to grow upon the air, drawing
from distant corners of the house, and along the corridors, a dreadful
sound, which made them tremble with affright; and the man knew that the
Beast came nigh. So they began to bid each other farewell. Vainly did
the maiden strive to hide her trouble when that perilous shape came
anear. And first the creature gazed at Beauty, as she shrank back,
clinging to her father, to whom he spake with a man’s voice, but in
slow and halting speech: “Good friend, ye be welcome, for well and
truly ye have holden your promise.” And then to her--“Beauty, come you
here of your will?”

And she answered quickly, “Yea, in good sooth.”

[Illustration: THE ROOM WHERE BEAUTY SLEPT. AT DAWN, A LADY CAME TO
COMFORT HER. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

The Beast seemed well pleased at that. Nevertheless, in gruesome tones,
he required of the merchant to be gone on the morrow, and that he
might never behold him any more. Then, with a strange, wistful
look at the girl, of mingled ruth and kindness, from under the shaggy
beast-like brows, he turned from the lighted chamber, and gat him away
to the darkness of his unknown den.

So that night, long after moonset, Beauty and her father still sat
together, hand laid to hand, speaking of past things, and loth to
part--these two, for whom all the joy of life seemed done--while the
lights burned low and the summer night waned fast. Overmuch sorrow
had made their eyes heavy, and they longed for some short rest before
the coming of the day that was to bring such bitter parting. Two fair
sleeping rooms they found prepared. And at dawn, in the grey light, a
pale woman, clad in long white raiment, stood beside Beauty’s bed. She
called very softly to the girl, bidding her have no fear of aught in
that place, but to keep her heart strong and true. Beauty was fain to
tell this dream to her father, that their parting might not be all too
dark and hopeless.

[Illustration]

When the sun was risen, the merchant looked out, and saw his horse
waiting, saddled, by the door. So with white set face he made him
ready; and as though constrained by some dreadful fate, he slowly
departed, nor once looked back to the gate, where Beauty stood in the
dewy morning light. There was no red in her cheek, and her grey eyes
were bright with unshed tears, as from the threshold she watched him
go. And so to her the world became desolate; and yesterday seemed far
away; and full far away and strange, already seemed to her the familiar
faces and sounds of home, as ever, fainter and fainter came back the
ring of horse-hoofs along the road, and died at last in the distance.

Therewithal Beauty went back into the silent house. She made no sorrow
out of measure, for she was great of heart; and the young are strong,
and slow to cast hope away. And within her soul also lay a little
hidden hope, most like to prophecy, that even in this place--where
some grizzly death might steal out and seize her unawares from the dim
corners of her prison--she might light soon upon the golden treasure
key, whereby a door should open on the secret way leading back to old
happier days, or perchance to some undreamed-of, goodlier world, and
her heart should win its scarce-known, unpronounced desire.

[Illustration]

Day followed day, and the girl forgot to call the Beast’s house her
prison. No troublous season of fear and doubt had she, but only long
summer days of peaceful sweetness, and nights of dreamless sleep. Daily
when the sun went down, and Beauty sat in the golden hall at supper,
the Beast came and sat there with her; and his dreadful noise had
grown less fearsome in her ears, and even was as it were, an unheard
terror. She ate and drank, conversing kindly, and heeding little the
ugliness of the presence that sat anear. Each night after supper,
that ill-favoured Beast did ask the lady, “Would she have him to her
husband?” And every time she made answer, “No--that might she never
do.” And therewith the Beast would hang down his head, and sigh so
dolorously that it were marvel to hear. And then Beauty grieved
very sorely for him, and full fain was she to pray him to come back,
whereas he shuffled from out of the sight of her. But yet her lips
could never shape fair words which her true heart forbade.

[Illustration: AFTER SUPPER, EVERY NIGHT, THE BEAST ASKED BEAUTY TO BE
HIS WIFE: EVERY NIGHT SHE SAID HIM NAY. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

Days went by, until the added sum of them at last made three long
years: and still Beauty’s life passed on dreamfully, in the palace
of the Beast. But for the sweet-voiced thrushes and nightingales,
which made melody in the rose-garden without, all day long and after
sun-down,--the silence of that solitude might have made the girl’s
heart sad. Within the dusky pine-branches, wild doves had their nests,
and to her ear their note had human tones. Often as she listened would
their never-ending love-plaint seem to bring anigh old home-scenes in
that other world, she used, she thought, to know full well.

After the three twelvemonths--which in that spellbound place seemed
but one summer long--there came a day when the lonely maid wandered
further in the garden than had been her wont. The gold hem of her
gown slid shining over the daisies and pink petals drifted down from
thorny brakes upon the grass, as she passed along green paths, to where
the flowers and the broad sunshine ceased. Under the beeches, in the
sun-flecked shade, her feet pressed last year’s crisp brown leaves;
hard by, under a knot of firs, a little thread of clear water, fell
sparkling into a marble basin. And Beauty leaned over the sculptured
edge, while many thoughts both sweet and bitter, went to and fro
across her brain. Down in the clear pool wavered gleams of some other
blue--shadows of other, not familiar, branching trees; till, as she
gazed into that little shallow, she deemed some picture lay there.
Through the leaves she dimly beheld, as in a very far distance, an old
grey tower, on a sandy ridge, beside the rippling sea. Coldly shone the
distant sunlight on the tower. The heavy iron-studded door stood wide
open; and there in the weed-grown court browsed the white goats, or
climbed the ruined wall, to reach down wandering tendrils of wild vine
rooted in the stones. Very solitary did that old grey tower seem, as,
dimmed with gathering tears, her eyes sought, but all in vain, one whom
she might nowhere find; then, as she gazed steadfastly, a dead leaf
fell and blurred the image, erewhile distinct and living.

Beauty was passing heavy when she rose and left the beechen grove. And
when, as she moved again along the fresh grassy pleasance, grey clouds
had dulled the sunshine, and a new fear oppressed her joyous spirit.

That evening-tide, at supper, the Beast might well discover how the
lady strove, but could not, to hide some sharp grief. Yet so daffish
was he withal, that no manner of cheer could he make her, nor yet
require her to say what had gone amiss; but only might he sit before
her in troubled thought and look askance with down-hung head.

Then at last spake Beauty, in naught misdoubting the Beast (for he had
ever shown himself kind and courteous to her, like a knight of old
time)--

“Sir, I fain would go to see my father for a space. In the little
fountain under the fir-tree, I saw an image of the tower; but my
father, nor none else, I could nowhere see, and therefore I greatly
fear for him.”

Thereupon the Beast made great dole; yet he could in no wise refuse so
sweet a one anything she would ask, were it much or little.

“Full woe am I of your departing,” he said, “for I fear me sore that
you will not come again.”

But Beauty answered again, “I promise you of my faith; for and I be not
sick, that in seven days’ time will I return.”

Then was the Beast comforted; and he gave her a golden ring of quaint
device, whereon was graven an unknown word in antique letters. And this
ring she was to lay under her pillow, on the night before the day set
for her return. Then was Beauty cut to the heart when she heard the
Beast groan, as he turned and went his way.

On the morrow that place was empty of her sweet presence. For when the
maiden awoke, all things were strange about her, and yet remembered
well; for she lay in the low poor sleeping room of old days, in her
father’s tower by the sea. Beside the bed hung great store of silken
gowns, very rich, and well beseen with gold and silver embroideries,
and sewn with pearls and many stones of price. Ill might such royal
weed beseem that poor dark place, which still she called her home;
but since there was no other, she did on in haste, the meanest of
all that rich apparelling. Then lightly ran down the tottering stair
to greet the beloved father. The merchant, sitting idle and alone in
the house-place, did certainly hear that which he thought to be a
well-known step. Yet so smitten was he with grief and long solitude,
that scarce he could find will to look up with dull eyes, when Beauty
came anear, and stood in the low arched doorway. There, for a moment,
she made sunlight in the dark with her lovely face and the sheen of
her gold-wrought gown. And when she was kneeling at his feet, scarce
indeed might Beauty persuade her father but that she were some hollow
shape, sent of enchantment to mock his wretchedness; no, scarcely,
even when she held him close, embracing him with loving arms, and had
kissed him a hundred times could he believe it was herself. And as at
last he let yield to joyful welcome, and with hand clasping hand they
sat together,--they each told other all that had befell since that
bitter day they parted; she, her bootless fears, her days of unhoped
peace; and he, of the elder sisters’ marriages, of the three brothers
gone away with many of that land to fight for the Holy Sepulchre. And
while they made great joy together, and the aged crone began to set
the board, right so the trampling of horse-hoofs sounded upon the
stones without. Beauty looked out, and beheld her sisters with their
husbands, at the door. Unbidden guests were they that morn; and with
their coming all the new gladness seemed to die away within the house;
hearts of those sisters were evil, and in their hands they brought
no blessing. Yet did Beauty strive to give them such kindly welcoming
as she might. Some pity, indeed, must she give them; for no happy life
was theirs. The elder had espoused a very proud and learned man, but
poor; and by him she was greatly despised. And the younger had for
husband a rich man, of very seemly person, who cared nought for other
goodliness than his own; and had scorn for his wife, withal she was so
fair. So when they were lighted down from their horses, and had come
into the house, and had begun to consider their young sister, how she
was well beseen like a princess, in her shining gown, though serving
them with such kindly grace, they were passing envious; and hatred,
like a sharp thorn, pierced through their jealous hearts. Sore grieved
were they when they knew that to her the Beast was in no wise perilous.
But to her sisters Beauty made but short the tale of how she fared in
that place. So within a while the two sisters departed secretly into
the green close behind the old tower, and came to a little hazel-brake
anigh the wild; and there they sat them down and made complaint,
bewailing them with tears and moans.

[Illustration: ONE SISTER’S HUSBAND, LIKE NARCISSUS OF OLD, WORSHIPPED
HIS OWN BEAUTY. BUT THE OTHER WAS FULL OF LEARNING. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

“Now are we in most evil plight,” said they, “that our sister, younger
than we, should go thus apparelled in silken stuffs, and live in a
king’s palace” (for so they called the house of the Beast). And then
they took secret council one with the other; for they said, “so we may
but prevail to keep her here yet another seven nights over and above
the time she appointed with the Beast, he will surely be avenged of her
falsehood; and then shall no gold save her life!”

And none heard save only the raven who abode in the trees. So these two
women came softly back into the house; and they showed unwonted love
for their sister, making much of her, and praying her to forget their
mauger, and the wrong they had done her in the old days before time
past.

[Illustration: ONLY THE RAVEN IN THE BRAKE, SAW THE SISTERS WEEP FOR
RAGE, AND HEARD THEM PLOT HER DEATH. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

And the maid, in her guilelessness, heard with joy their false words.
And when the day was almost come that she should depart they made show
of grief, and besought her to abide with them but one seven nights
longer. Beauty looked to her father; but he covered his face, and dared
say nought, for he was sore afeared of the Beast’s wroth.

And so for that while Beauty forgot her promise, and let herself be
forsworn, and yielded her will to those two women, nought witting of
their most felon device. Thus it came to pass that she was well-nigh
lost for the bitter malice of them that wished her death.

Yet in all these days the maid was not glad; but greatly troubled
when she thought on the Beast. Very pitiful waxed Beauty’s heart, as
she remembered of all her friend’s goodness, and his sorrow of her
departing. And so it happened, that on the tenth night after, she
dreamed a dream. She beheld the Beast as he lay a-dying under a great
tree in the garden. And the garden was a very great way off, and she so
far away, she might not help him in his sore need; nor call to him, nor
with tender words hold him back from death. With that great horror she
awoke in the darkness, and weeping, gave herself the blame.

“Alas!” she said, “my broken faith; alas! that ever I should have thus
forsook my friend; and if he die, now must I grieve to my life’s end.”
Then she hastily laid her magic ring under the pillow, which was all
wetted with her weeping. And soon for heaviness she fell on sleep. In
the springing of the day Beauty opened her eyes, and, behold, she lay
in the green-hung chamber wherein she had so greatly longed to be.

The golden autumn day rose fair and still on the silent manor and the
garden of the Beast. All the long hours until evensong, must the maiden
wait; then he would show himself, and she would comfort him, and tell
him of sweet coming days, wherein she never more would leave him.

The golden hours sped slowly. Slowly and softly fell the rose-leaves
upon the grass. The song-birds that day hid in hushed silence, anear
the garden bowers where Beauty sat alone, weaving flowers and fruits
and birds unknown to earth, upon the silken loom. And evermore the
longed-for evening hour drew on. Anon she heard the clock smite, and
she gat her with haste into the house.

In the hall the table was covered, and Beauty, arrayed in a broidered
gown of red samite, sat in her place and waited. No fresh garlands
behanged the walls, but only brown and withered leaves. And she wist
not anything of the Beast; and she had no mind to eat and drink, for
a cold dread overcame her that some misadventure had befallen him,
whiles she listened for the least sound whereby she might know that
he approached. But when he came not within a while, she must needs go
seek him throughout the manor. But the chambers were empty, and the
garden void, and whenas she called none answer came. Then she bethought
her of the little fountain in the wood, and she ran thither. There,
indeed, under a pine-tree upon the grass, lay that hapless Beast in
a deadly swoon. And Beauty sank down upon her knees beside him, and
raised his head in her arms; and it dread her sore but that he were in
great peril of death. And then she grieved, and gave herself reproach
and upbraiding. And, “Oh, dear Beast! what aileth thee?” she cried.
“Alas! that ever he saw me to have such sorrow.”

But when she had fetched a little water, and had put it in his mouth,
the Beast came to himself. So he opened his eyes and looked upon the
girl full sadly. And therewithal he said, in a full weak voice, “Alas!
fair maid; why hast thou so long delayed? for now I fear me I shall
die: for I feel well, the deep draughts of death draw to my heart.”

Then did she make great moan, and besought the Beast of his love for
her not to die and forsake her. But he seemed as though he heard not;
and ever his breath came slower, and more faint. And then Beauty fell
to weeping as though her heart would break; and remembering her of all
his gentleness and kindness, and that now he was like to die through
her unkindness, in her anguish she called the Beast her love, her only
love.

[Illustration]

With that word there befell a strange adventure. But one moment agone,
the maid had holden in her arms the Beast’s grim, hairy head; and in
her grief she knew not how it slid away from her embrace. For when
she looked, there was nought but crushed leaves and grass where the
dying Beast had lain. Also a dreamlike brightness seemed to mingle
silverly about the dusk of evening, as though the moon had risen, or
that starlight trembled upon the gloom. Then all bewildered and amazed,
she deemed that some young prince, clad in rich clothes, with jewelled
mantle and scarlet plume, stood anear. So, forgetting fear in her
trouble, she prayed him without more ado to tell her, “Had he seen the
Beast? For,” she said, “mine own dear Beast lay here but now, and like
to die, and he is gone, and I know not where he is become.”

[Illustration: AH DEAR BEAST, SHE SAID: ALAS THAT MY UNKINDNESS SHOULD
THUS SLAY THEE. LEIGHTON, BROS.]

But the strange prince held his peace, and none answer gave he to her
most piteous cry; only he kneeled down beside the maid, and then full
gently did he kiss her golden hair, that spread all wide adown
her neck, and then he kissed her red lips; and whenas, wondering and
angered, she drew from him, and would have started away, he took her in
his arms and said, “Oh lovely one, do you not then know me? Look at me,
and see; for indeed I am that Beast, and he was me!”

But Beauty trembled, nor durst she look; for well she knew there had
been some enchantment; and, sithence, it was a man and no Beast that
spake, yet in his voice, and in the words he said, she seemed to
hearken to the friend that she had lost erewhile. Then quick tears, but
not of sorrow, filled her eyes, for an unwonted thing had happened;
yet was it to her but as the fulfilment of some dear dream in old,
forgotten, long-past days.

[Illustration]

And so, alone together there, amid the brown dusk of coming night, for
a little space, were they silent for very joy. And then did Beauty, in
all maiden trust, give him, that had been the Beast, her true word, and
promised that she would be his wedded wife. Then he lifted her to her
feet, and led her home along those same sweet grassy paths. And as they
went, he told her all the tale of the cruel spell which had bound him
since these many woful years, in that unhappy shape, and how nought
but a dear maiden’s love might set him free, and of how great had been
his hopeless love for her.

Silently the white moths floated by. The gentle winds of summer sighed
odorously, and stirred the broad hazel-leaves on either hand the close
green alley, as they went; while loose-petalled roses bloomed and fell
in aisles of overarching sweetness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Therewith a great clearness shone around them; and as they came nigh
the house, burning lights shone from the windows; and there was music,
and the noise of merry voices mingling in songs and laughter. Strange
sounds, long unheard in that still house! Then from the door the
Beast’s mother, a sweet and noble lady, came forth to meet them; and
great joy made she, as she beheld her son, coming in his own likeness,
as he was or that strange magic was laid on him. And then she embraced
Beauty, and with her heart she made her right welcome.

Now the lady was a queen. She was the same that came afore to Beauty in
a dream to comfort her.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Here then endeth the tale; sith it were over-long to tell of the revels
and the dances, and of how the golden Hall was engarlanded with roses,
and of the great feast held there, on the day that Beauty and the Beast
were wedded together; nor need we tell, of how the merchant-master
was called from his lonely tower, and came thither on his fair child’s
marriage morn; whenas his sorrowful days had end for evermore; and
of how his three brave sons became most noble knights, and greatly
renowned for the destroying of many pagan knights and giants, and of
divers fell beasts and griffins of that time.

[Illustration: LOVE IS THE MAGIC, THAT MAKES ALL THINGS FAIR. LEIGHTON,
BROS.]

But Beauty’s sisters, came never near that happy house. For wit you
well, the winter rasure of such-like cankers, may not approach the
green summer, wherein the flower of true love flourisheth.


THE END.




  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italics are shown thus: _sloping_.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation are retained.

  Perceived typographical errors have been changed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


