The Project Gutenberg eBook of The curse of drink
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The curse of drink

Author: W. C. Tuttle

Release date: January 1, 2025 [eBook #75018]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Doubleday, Doran & Company, 1929

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CURSE OF DRINK ***



“THE CURSE OF DRINK”

By W. C. TUTTLE

Author of “The Keeper of Red Horse Pass,” “Three On and Everybody Down,”
etc.


    THE COWTOWN OF SAN PABLO AIMED TO GIVE A PLAY FOR THE BENEFIT
    OF PARSON JONES’ CANNIBALS. THOSE ABLE PUNCHERS, PEEWEE PARKER
    AND HOZIE SYKES, AIMED TO ACT IN IT. THEY DID--QUITE SOME. BUT
    WHEN THE LAST CURTAIN--AMONG OTHER THINGS--FELL, THE CHIEF
    WINNER FROM THE RIOT WAS EVELINE ANNABEL WIMPLE.

“Man,” says “Judgment” Jones, “is of few days and full of woe.”

Well, I reckon he’s right. I’m of a cheerful disposition, kinda goin’
through life with a wide grin, tryin’ to see everythin’ in the right
light and do well by my feller man; but when Old Man Woe sneaks up
behind and swats yuh with his loaded quirt--what’ll yuh have?

“Peewee” Parker says that as long as yuh stick to what the good Lord
ordained for yuh to do, yo’re all right. He picked me and Peewee to be
first-class cowpunchers, that’s a cinch, ’cause we ain’t never goin’ to
be no good for anythin’ else, if for that.

And then there’s “Boll-Weevil” Potts, first name Hank. He’s about six
feet six inches lengthways, and with no width to speak of; bein’ built a
heap like a single-shot rifle. Hank’s all right, but nature was in a
playful mood when she laid out his specifications. And he runs to ears
so fluently that he has to wear a six and seven-eighths hat on a seven
and a quarter head to keep it from wearin’ the top off his ears. As a
distinguishin’ mark, he wears a brown derby.

I don’t hold that any man has a right to wear that kind of a war-bonnet
in a cow country. It is jist a invitation to those desirin’ a legitimate
target. But Hank owns the No-Limit Saloon, along with the HP cow outfit,
and that kinda gives him the right to look kinda doggy, as yuh might
say.

Me and Peewee runs the HP outfit for Hank. Peewee Parker weighs two
hundred and fifty on the hoof, and he ain’t so awful tall. I’m “Hozie”
Sykes, one of the real old Sykes family. My folks was in this country
when the Mayflower came over. I’ve heard paw tell about one of his
great, great grandfathers, who was livin’ down in Arizona at that time.
He heard about this boatload of folks comin’ over; so the old man
hitched up his oxen and headed for California. He said the damn’ country
was gittin’ overrun with foreigners.

I’m merely tellin’ yuh this to prove my pedigree. Peewee don’t know much
about his family further back than two generations, but that don’t hurt
his chances to be a good puncher. Owners of cow outfits don’t question
yuh much, when yuh apply for a saddle-slickin’ job.

Hank Boll-Weevil Potts married Susie Hightower. Sometimes I look at Hank
and know dang well he wishes it was merely an unfounded rumor. Susie
weighs two-twenty, and takes after her pa--and that’s takin’ quite a
lot. “Zibe” Hightower is somethin’ for to take after. He ain’t very big,
but if all the rest of the meanness in the world was give him, you’d
never notice the difference in his actions.

Zibe wears flowin’ mustaches, two guns and a scowl. He’s been in the San
Pablo range since long before they built the hills and made the cuts for
water to run off in, and he says he’ll be here long after it’s all flat
land again. Nobody knows how old he is, but I’ve heard him tell how he
showed the cliff dwellers how to build their huts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Everythin’ was goin’ along all right, except for an occasional fight
among ourselves or with the town of Oasis, that sink-pot of iniquity to
the south of San Pablo, when along comes Eveline Annabel Wimple. Now, I
don’t mean any disrespect to a pretty lady. They’re necessary, I reckon.
Hank showed me her card, and it says, in real pretty gold
letters--Eveline Annabel Wimple, D. T.

I got a good look at her, and I says, “Well, they ain’t so bad to see.”

“What ain’t?” he asks.

“Them D. T’s. I had an idea they was more serpentine, as yuh might say.”

“That D. T. stuff means Dramatic Teacher.”

“Pertainin’ to actin’?” asks Peewee.

“With flourishes,” admits Hank. “She learns yuh stage actin’.”

“I’ve allus hankered to be a contortionist,” says Peewee. “Yuh don’t
suppose she teaches yuh how to bend, do yuh?”

“Does that come under the headin’ of dramatic?”

“It shore would, if Peewee ever bent,” says I. “He lays on his back now
to pull on his boots. But what in hell is a dramatic teacher doin’ in
San Pablo?”

“It ain’t clear to me jist yet,” says Hank “Judgment Jones and her kinda
holds several pow-wows, and it’s somethin’ to do with the church.
Judgment has been tryin’ to raise money enough to buy himself some fresh
pants, or a pulpit or a bell, or somethin’ needful for Christianity. He
ain’t flourished yet, as yuh might say. He said he’d have some news for
me in a short time.”

“That woman is pretty,” says Peewee. “You better keep away from her,
Hank.”

“I’m a married man--and I’m satisfied.”

“Satisfied that yo’re married?”

“Thoroughly convinced,” said Hank sadly. “Oh, it’s all right with me,
but when I see a damned old hi-ree-glyphic like Zibe Hightower shinin’
around her, grinnin’ like a Hallowe’en cat, I git hot. I said to him,
‘You ought to have more sense, you danged old shadder of a vanished
age.’ And he says, ‘I’m single, ain’t I?’

“I told him he was worse than single--that he was minus one, and he got
hot. Said jist because I was happily married, I was tryin’ to keep him
from marriage bliss. Marriage bliss! And Mrs. Judgment Jones is kinda on
the warpath, too. She thinks Judgment is showin’ this here D. T. woman
too much attention. She told Mrs. Zeke Hardy that she knowed Judgment
was smitten, ’cause for the first time in years and years he washed the
back of his neck. She said the only reason Judgment faces the devil is
’cause he’s ashamed to turn around on account of his neck. Oh, I dunno.
The whole town is kinda stirred up.”

“Susie stirred up?” I asks.

“Most always is. She’s learnin’ to shoot a six-gun. Hurt her arm the
last time she throwed a flat-iron at me. Them things kinda keep a man
active, I s’pose. Some married men kinda git in a rut, but if I ever do
I’m a goner. Well, I took her for better or worse, and I shore got it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

We left Hank to his reveries of a squirshed love, and has a few drinks
at the No-Limit, after which we’re unfortunate in runnin’ into Zibe
Hightower. He’s wearin’ a clean shirt and he shore smells of perfume.

“Heel-yuh-tripe?” asks Peewee. “Zibe, yuh shore smell tainted. Mebbe
it’s ’cause yo’re so old--kept too long, as yuh might say.”

“I smell to suit m’self!” snaps Zibe.

“Exclusive of everybody else. Why all the odor?”

“Ain’t this a free country?”

“With certain limits. You ain’t learnin’ dramatics, are yuh, Zibe?”

“Why not? All the world’s a stage.”

“And that makes us all stage drivers,” says I.

“Yo’re funny,” says Zibe. “Yuh ought to study comedy. Pers’nally, I’ve
got the physical assets to make a tragedian--voice, carriage--”

“Squeak and a buckboard,” interrupts Peewee. “Tragedian!”

“I have so. I could do Shakespeare.”

“Shore--in a horse-trade. As far as that’s concerned, I ain’t never seen
anybody yuh couldn’t do, Zibe. Yo’re in love.”

“No such a damn thing!”

“How old is she?”

“I ain’t askin’ no lady her age. Anyway, age don’t make no difference;
so--sa-a-a-ay, what lady are yuh talkin’ about?”

“The one Judgment Jones is nutty about.”

“That old Scriptural scorpion!”

“He’s here to save yore soul. Said so last Sunday.”

“Well, he don’t need to worry about my soul. I don’t.”

“Yuh would, if yuh had any. Right now all yuh need is one of them little
bird whistles to make yuh imitate a flower garden. Man, yuh shore smell
like a bed of Sweet Williams.”

“Some day, Peewee Parker, I’m goin’ to hang yore hide on a bobwire
fence.”

“Pick yore day, feller, and bring the lady along.”

Not bein’ interested in dramatic teachin’ nor the troubles of married
folks, me and Peewee goes back to the HP ranch. We’re dependable and as
honest as the average run of cowpunchers. Of course, we don’t cut down
no cherry trees, and then run our legs off to tell folks about it, but
we git along. As long as the law keeps away from us, we’ll keep away
from the law.

That night at supper time, Peewee gits to tellin’ me about one time he
acts in a play. I figure he’s lyin’, of course, but a good lie is
interestin’. Accordin’ to Peewee, he’s a pretty good actor. He shot six
men in this play--two at one shot. He’s one of them pyramid liars--keeps
pilin’ one on top of the other. I stopped him before he got too good. I
ain’t never done no actin’, but I never seen anythin’ a Sykes couldn’t
do; that is, anythin’ that’s honest.

“It took me a long time to git as good as I was,” says Peewee. “I’ll bet
I was good enough to git a job in New York actin’ on a stage.”

“You wasn’t a good actor--you was a good shot. All the good actors I
ever seen killed ’em with knives.”

“Well,” says Peewee, “I was a good actor. I wanted to kill ’em with
knives, but the boss said, ‘You go ahead and shoot ’em, Peewee--knives
is too messy.’”

“You never played in Shakespeare, didja?” I asks.

“Nope, only in Dry Lake. This was a home talent show. But I’m good. The
stage shore got robbed when I turned my talents to punchin’ cows.”

“Yeah, and for turnin’ yore talents yuh ought to be arrested for cruelty
to dumb animals,” says I.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next day Hank Potts showed up, unfolded from his bronc, and sat down
with us on the porch of the adobe ranchhouse. Hank looks kinda shopworn,
as yuh might say.

“I came out to rest m’ nerves,” says he. “I’m a actor.”

“What kind of a actor?” queried Peewee.

“Good. I’m the leadin’ man--hee-roo--gits the fair damsel in the end.”

“Who is the fair damsel--Miss Eveline Annabel Wimple, D. T?” I asks.

“Don’t be comical, Horde,” says Hank kinda sad-like.

“Speak--yo’re among friends,” says Peewee.

“It’s thisaway,” sighs Hank. “We held a meetin’ last night. Miss Wimple
aims to put on a show for the benefit of the church.”

“And the meetin’ busted up in a fight,” says Peewee, bein’ somewhat of a
prophet.

“A discussion,” says Hank. “Miss Wimple has a play of her own, which she
desires us to play. Bein’ as she is to furnish the play, train the
actors, et cettery, and all that, she’s to receive seventy-five percent
of the profits, the other twenty-five percent goin’ to Judgment Jones
and his church.

“That started a argument among us. Miss Wimple argues that her play is a
dinger, and the only available play in this county, when my wife----”

“She would,” agrees Peewee.

“I never knowed Susie wrote a play,” confesses Hank. “I never knowed a
thing about it, until she steps out and says we can have her play free.”

“It would be worth at least that,” says Peewee.

“She calls it--” Hank stops to sigh deeplike--“_The Curse of Drink_. And
me runnin’ a first-class rum shop.”

“Mebbe,” says Peewee, “she meant sody water or some soft drink.”

Hank shakes his head. “I read it, Peewee.”

“What’s it all about, anyway?”

“Gawd forgive me for sayin’ anythin’ against my wife, but I don’t know
what it’s all about. Miss Wimple read it. Judgin’ from the expression of
her face, as she read it, it’s a comedy. Even if Susie don’t think so.
I’m goin’ to be Howard Chesterfield, a jockey. I’m the jigger,” says
Hank sad-like, jambin’ his derby down over one eye, “what wins the race,
saves the mortgage and wins the girl.”

“That’d be worth goin’ a long ways to see,” says I.

“That’s what Miss Wimple said. But we’re short of actors. Susie suggests
that we git you two fellers to play with us. But I said neither of yuh
knowed the first thing about actin’, and Miss Wimple said that mebbe I
was right, ’cause, as she read the play, it needed somebody with more
brains than an ordinary cowpuncher has to play them parts.”

“Lemme tell you somethin’!” says Peewee. “I’ve done more actin’ than you
ever seen. I was a actor before you ever knowed there was anythin’ but a
four-wheel stage on earth; and I never seen any part I can’t play.”

“I ditto all that and sign my name,” says I. “When it comes to play
actin’, a Sykes jist falls naturally into the part.”

“This is a hard play to act,” says Hank.

“That’s my meat,” declares Peewee. “I’ve shore bit off some hard ones.”

“Didja ever see a horse on the stage?” asks Hank.

“Well,” says Peewee, “I kinda have, but I never favored ’em.”

“This’n has got to have a racehorse for me to ride. Susie said we ort to
have a lot of horses to make up the race, but--I dunno.”

“Yuh might use Tequila,” says I, and Hank kinda shudders. Tequila was a
racehorse. I say “was,” meanin’ the present time. Hank bought him off a
horse-trader for a hundred dollars. Fastest horse on earth for a hundred
yards, and then crossed his front feet. Always crossed his front feet.
Worked himself into a lather, looked like a racehorse, ran like a scared
coyote for a hundred yards and then--well, Hank kept him.

“Might use him,” admitted Hank. “Got a lotta sense.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Hank wouldn’t commit himself further, and went back to San Pablo. We
don’t hear nothin’ more about it for a couple days, when cometh
“Dog-Rib” Davidson, of Oasis. Dog-Rib almost runs Zibe Hightower a
dead-heat, when it comes to bein’ mean, and if all the hate in his
carcass was laid end to end, yuh could use it for a trail marker from
New York to Honolulu.

“I’ve been laughin’ m’self hoarse for two days,” says Dog-Rib. “Them
there San Pabloers are goin’ to put on a play-actin’ show, with Hank
Boll-Weevil Potts as the big he buzzard of the flock. Calls it _The
Curse of Drink_. Haw, haw, haw! Can yuh imagine it? I can’t. I’ve seen
shows in my life, I have.”

“You look like yuh had seen plenty, but never had none,” says Peewee.
“You shore look to me like a man who never had a show from the start.”

“I’ve allus got along,” says Dog-Rib.

“I reckon all of Oasis will be at the show,” says I.

“Oh, shore. Accordin’ to their epitaphs, every ticket will have a number
on it, and the lucky ticket will win Hank Potts’s racehorse. The tickets
are one dollar per each, and no questions asked. Alkali and Oasis has
shore invested heavy in them tickets. But it’ll be a awful show.”

“It’s about time they asked us in to learn our parts,” says Peewee,
after Dog-Rib goes away. “We’ve got to have a little time.”

But by that time the next day there hadn’t nobody showed up to tell us;
so we saddled up and went to San Pablo. The bartender at Hank’s place
tells us that the actors and actresses are all over at the San Pablo
Hall, where the _Curse of Drink_ is to make its showin’, and then he
gave us a couple of handbills which read:

                          WORLD PREEMEER

                       “THE CURSE OF DRINK”

                                By
                          SUSIE H. POTTS

                  A PLAY IN SEVEN ACTS & SOME SEENS

    THE CAST:

        Eveline Annabel Wimple, D. T.         Gwendolyn Witherspoon
        Hennery Potts                      Howard Chesterfield Zibe
        Hightower                                      Simon Legree
        Limpy Lucas                                Lord Worthington
        Mrs. Thursday Noon                         Lady Worthington
        Zeke Hardy                                        Uncle Tom
        Olaf Swenson                                          Jason
        SUSIE HIGHTOWER POTTS as                         LITTLE EVA

    Presented by Eveline Annabel Wimple, D. T. under the auspices of the
    San Pablo Church and Susie Hightower Potts.

    Tickets are one dollar including a chance on winning the racehorse
    used in this production.

    Don’t miss this chance to see Howard Chesterfield win the big DERBY
    RACE and see LITTLE EVA go to heaven. Either one will be worth the
    price of admission.

“When is this here show to transpire?” asked Peewee.

“Tomorrow night,” says the bartender. “Eight o’clock sharp. She’s goin’
to be a dinger, gents. I’ve seen some of it, but from now on, she’s
private. I tell yuh, they had a hell of a time gettin’ Tequila up there.
Took him up this mornin’. Built a platform plumb across one end of the
hall, and they’ve been carpenterin’ and paintin’ up there for three
days. If it ain’t worth seein’, I never seen anythin’. Every danged seat
in the house is sold.”

“We ain’t got none,” says Peewee.

“Well, yuh won’t git none. They’re all gone. Alkali and Oasis shore
bought ’em in quantities.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Wasn’t that a nice thing to do--sell ’em all out thataway? I shore
intended to speak to Hank Potts about it, but he never showed up; so me
and Peewee got a gallon of hard liquor and went back to the ranch,
brewin’ up a hate against San Pablo. We left word with the bartender to
tell Hank Potts what we thought of him and his show.

“Two of the best actors in the country--and they left us out,” mourns
Peewee. “Tha’s great. And me, who made Bill Shakespeare turn over in his
grave twice in one evenin’ in Dry Lake.”

I’m kinda hazy about things after that. A gallon of Hank’s liquor would
make a jackrabbit waylay a lobo wolf. Time don’t mean anythin’ to yuh,
and I thought it was the night before, when I realize that Hank Potts is
among us, and with him is a beautiful lady. I remember tryin’ to shake
hands with her and got Hank’s nose in my hand.

“I’m layin’ my cards on the table,” says Hank. “You fellers said yuh
knew how to act, didn’t yuh? In two hours we’re due to lift the curtain,
and we’re shy two actors. Zibe Hightower and Zeke Hardy got into a
fight, and Olaf Swenson tried to help Zeke, until Susie bent a
two-by-four over Olaf’s head. Zeke is plumb out of order, too. For the
honor and glory of San Pablo, I ask you to help us out. Hozie, you’ll be
Uncle Tom, and Peewee will be Jason.”

“Please, gentlemen,” says the lady. “I am Miss Wimple.”

“I’ll bezzer wife don’ know yo’re out here with thish woman,” says
Peewee.

“The curse of drink,” says the lady soft-like.

“If you think I’m drunk now,” says Peewee, “you ought to shee me, when
I’m right.”

“Yo’re both too drunk to act,” says Hank.

“Zasso? Who is? Me and Hozie? Say! Feller, I could play all the parts in
yore show, includin’ the racehorsh, without any rehearshal--tha’s me. Go
and git the horshes, Hozie, ’f yuh please.”

Peewee bowed to me, hit his head on the corner of the table, and wanted
to fight Hank for hittin’ him when he wasn’t lookin’. Anyway, we got to
town an hour before the show is due to commence. I got me a couple more
drinks, which I didn’t actually need, and then they took me up into the
hall. The back of that stage is full of actors and actresses, and I
remember Judgment Jones shakin’ hands with me and God blessin’ me for
helpin’ ’em out.

“The Sykes fambly never ignores a call for help,” I says. “Bring on yore
crowd and lemme act.”

I ain’t never played in a show before, but I thought I had. That’s what
jiggle juice will do for yuh. I kinda relaxed for a few moments, and
when I realized things again, I finds Hank Boll-Weevil Potts and Zibe
Hightower workin’ over me with somethin’ that smells a heap like
turpentine.

“Keep yore eyes open, Hozie,” says Hank, “they might stick.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Bein’ in a happy state of mind, I let ’em go ahead, not realizin’ that
they was paintin’ me black as the ace of spades. It don’t hurt none,
except kinda makin’ me stiff around the eyes. They left me in the chair
and went about their business, and pretty soon I finds I ain’t got no
shoes on, and my feet are so black they shine. And by that time my face
is so stiff I can’t spit and I can’t blink my eyes. All I can do is
stare at things.

“In the first act, yuh ain’t got to say a word,” says Hank, “except at
the end, where you and Zibe walk out, you say to Susie, ‘God bless yore
kind heart, Miss Eva.’ Can yuh remember that, Hozie?”

I kinda nods. Remember? Shore I can remember. If somebody would crack
the paint around my mouth, I might say somethin’.

I can hear Judgment Jones out in front of the curtain, explainin’
things, and I hear him tell that me and Peewee has been added to the
show. Miss Eveline Annabel Wimple finds me, and she says in a voice what
is kinda choked, “Uncle Tom, yo’re goin’ to be a knockout.”

Then along comes Zibe Hightower. He’s wearin’ an old plug hat, long,
black coat, which Judgment Jones uses on Sunday, a pair of striped pants
and boots. He’s got some big black eyebrows painted up above his scrawny
ones and his mustache is as black as ink. In one hand he’s packin’ a
blacksnake whip, and he’s seven-eighths drunk.

There’s Susie Hightower Potts, wearin’ a knee-length white dress, and
she’s wearin’ more paint than a warpath Apache. Susie weighs two-twenty
on the hoof, and she ain’t over five feet tall. Cometh Hank Potts, ready
for the fray, wearin’ one of his wife’s polka-dot waists, a pair of
tight pants made out of a sheet, and a pair of boots, which he has
painted with black enamel. On his head is a little speckled jockey cap,
with a long beak.

“Limpy” Lucas is almost in-cog-neeto in a boiled shirt, glasses and
Hank’s old brown derby. Mrs. Thursday Noon is wearin’ a necklace of them
cut-glass dinguses off a chandelier, a feather fan, and a dress so
danged tight that she couldn’t set down without havin’ a accident.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Then cometh a interruption in the shape of Dog-Rib Davidson, Roarin’
Lyons and “Nebrasky” Smith. The two former are from Oasis, and the
latter is from Alkali.

“We’ve been appointed a committee,” states Dog-Rib. “We bought tickets
in good faith, expectin’ to see a show, but we finds that you’ve done
fired two of yore best actors--Zeke Hardy and Olaf Swenson--and we know
why yuh ditched ’em. It’s ’cause Zeke used to live in Oasis, and Olaf
used to hibernate in Alkali. We hereby demand our money back.”

“No, yuh can’t do that,” says Hank. “We’re ready to start the show.”

“Money or scalps,” says Roarin’.

“Let us arbitrate,” suggests Judgment Jones. “We’ve got two better
actors to take their places, and the show will be much better.”

“That’s what you say,” grunts Dog-Rib. “Where’s the proof?”

“How’s it better, I’d crave to know, that’s what I’d crave,” says
Roarin’ Lyons.

“Brother, you’ve got a cravin’,” agrees Nebrasky, “and so have I.”

“Well,” says Hank sad-like, “the only way to prove it is to go ahead and
play her out, boys.”

“I’ll tell yuh what we’ll do,” says Dog-Rib. “I’m a fair man and I’ll
allus do the right thing. Us, as a committee, will judge. We’ll watch
yuh do this here play-actin’, and if we decided it ain’t as good as Zeke
and Olaf could have played her, you give us back our money.”

“My Gawd!” groans Hank. “In yore opinion! Well, I reckon it’ll be all
right, Dog-Rib.”

“We’ll be on the front row,” warns Dog-Rib, “and yuh better give us
plenty show for our money. We’ll be especially watchin’ Peewee and
Hozie.”

And me without a voice in the matter. I’d quit right now, if I could
talk enough to resign. The rest of the outfit gits around me, and they
shore told me a lot I didn’t know about actin’.

“You two jiggers ain’t the leadin’ parts in this here drammer of the
Sunny South,” says Hank, “but right now yo’re prominent as hell. On you
depends about five hundred dollars; so act. San Pablo is watchin’ yuh.”

“I’ll do my bes’,” declares Peewee, “and if it comes to the worsht, I
can lick about three of that committee. How about you, Hozie?”

I don’t say nothin’. Peewee takes hold of my face and squeezes it a
little. It left my nose out of line and my lips open, as though I was
goin’ to whistle.

“Hank, that paint hardened on Hozie,” says Peewee. “He can’t talk.”

“All right. Mebbe it’ll be better. There goes the openin’ music.”

It’s the three-piece orchestra--bull fiddle, accordion and drum, playin’
“My Old Kentucky Home,” with variations.

                  *       *       *       *       *

After that, the show started, and Hank led me and Peewee around to where
we can see what’s goin’ on.

“This first act is the drawin’-room of the Witherspoon mansion,”
whispers Hank. “Watch Susie and Miss Wimple; they do this well.”

I reckon I got some paint in my ears, ’cause I don’t hear so awful good,
but I hears Susie sayin’, “--since my darlin’ pappy died----”

And then Dog-Rib stands up and says, “Wait a minute, will yuh. Lemme git
this straight. Is Zibe Hightower dead?”

“That’s worth the price of admission,” says “Kansas” McGill, “if she
gives the right answer.”

Old Judgment Jones steps out and says, “This here is all actin’, and
Zibe ain’t dead. Now, we don’t want no more interruptin’ from nobody.
Amen.”

“You shore act cheerful while givin’ bad news,” says Kansas, and the
show starts in ag’in.

I can’t git head nor tail to any of it. Mrs. Thursday Noon comes on, and
the audience gives a big whoop. She shore sparkles, but forget what she
came out there for, and proceeds to knock over a table and hit her chin
on the edge of the sofy, where Miss Wimple is settin’. Her necklace got
up around her ears and the dress busted between the shoulders, but they
got her propped up on the sofy. The thing seems kinda deadlocked out
there, so Hank Potts goes on. They gave Hank three cheers, but he don’t
mind. He’s got somethin’ to say, and he’s sayin’ it.

“When yore daddy died he called me to his bedside and he says to me,
‘Howard Chesterfield, everythin’ I own has been swept away, except my
two daughters and my racehorse, and I--I----’”

Hank goes bug-eyed and forgets the rest.

“The horse was too fast and one daughter was too heavy, eh?” suggests
somebody from Oasis.

“Go on, Howard; go on,” begs Miss Wimple, and Hank mumbles for a minute.

“You are goin’ to ride Thunderbolt in the big race?” asks Miss Wimple.

“That’s it,” grins Hank. “Thunderbolt will win, and you’ll all git back
yore fortune.”

“But we haven’t money enough left to enter the horse.”

“I--I’ve saved my salary,” says Hank. “I’ll enter the horse.”

“But we can’t afford to hire a jockey.”

“I’ll ride him,” says Hank, hammerin’ himself on the chest. “I’ll wear
the glue and bold of the Witherspoon stables. I--I mean the bold and
glue.”

“Oh, you hero!” explodes Susie. “I knew you’d be loyal.”

Old Zibe has come around where we are, and now he hammers on a loose
board with the butt of his whip. From the other side comes Peewee
Parker, all dressed up in a funny lookin’ blue suit.

“Someone at the door, Jason,” says Miss Wimple. Peewee goggles around,
and Zibe motions him over to us. When he’s out of sight of the audience,
Zibe grabs me by the wrist, and the next thing I know I’m out there in
the middle of the stage, with Zibe bangin’ onto me. He takes off his
hat, bows to the ladies and then takes a look at Hank.

“So yo’re the jockey who is goin’ to ride Thunderbolt, eh?” says Zibe.
“Well, go on back to the stable--I want to talk with highgrade folks.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Hank hops his arms like he was sad all over, but goes out. Zeke grins at
Susie and Miss Wimple.

“I’m Simon Legree,” says he, “and I want to sell yuh a nigger.”

Susie takes one look at me, jumps up and throws up both hands.

“Uncle Tom!” she yells. “Uncle Tom! What have they done to you?”

Jist then my mouth busts loose, and I says, “They got me drunk and
painted me with black enamel, and I can lick any damn’ man ----”

Zibe kicked me on the bare ankle and hisses in my ears, “Shut up, you
danged fool!”

“Haw, haw, haw, haw, haw!” roars Dog-Rib. “That’s actin’!”

“O-o-o-o-oh!” wails Susie. “They sold you, Uncle Tom.”

“Somebody got gypped,” says Nebrasky Smith.

“I got him in that boatload of niggers down at Nashville,” says Zibe. “I
recognized him right away, and I knowed you’d like to buy him back.”

“Oh, I’d love to buy him back,” says Susie, “but we ain’t got no money,
Mister Legree.”

“Lotta good work left in that nigger,” says Zibe. “How about tradin’ me
yore racehorse for him?”

Zibe kicks me in the ankle and whispers, “Beg her not to. Go ahead and
beg.”

“Ma’am,” says I, tryin’ to work my face into shape for talkin’, “don’t
let this jigger make any trades with yuh. He’s a ----”

_Whap!_ Old Zibe steps back and wraps that bullwhip around my legs.

“Git back, nigger!” he roars. “Git back, or I’ll cut yore legs off!”

I ask yuh if that wasn’t a dirty trick. I didn’t like Zibe, anyway; so I
took a wild swing at his jaw, knocked him silly with one punch, took him
to my bosom and pitched him headfirst into the committee on the first
row.

“The nigger wins by a knockout!” yells “Greasy” Easton, and somebody cut
the curtain loose, with the _Curse of Drink_ outfit haulin’ me back by
the slack of my overalls.

Well, I got told all about myself, while old Zibe manages to get around
to the back, where he got his gun and wanted to assassinate me, but they
took his gun away. The committee comes up and says that the show begins
to look like it was worth the money, but they’ve got to see it all
first.

While they’re tryin’ to fix the stage for the next act, Hank explains
the show to me.

“In that first act, the father of them two girls has just died, leavin’
’em nothin’ but that racehorse. I was their father’s jockey, and this
horse is to win a big race. That’s the climax. Legree owns a horse in
that race, but he knows it can’t beat our horse; so he schemes to git
our horse. Legree is the villain, yuh see. Yo’re an old nigger, which
was owned by the old man, who went broke and had to sell yuh, along with
other slaves. Legree buys yuh. He knows Susie is crazy about yuh, and he
figures to trade you to her for this racehorse. She won’t trade the
first time; so he beats yuh up--”

“He tries to, yuh mean,” says I.

“That was all in the play, Hozie. You ruined it. There won’t nobody know
what it’s all about now. We’ve got to go ahead with the second act. This
act----”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Comes a lot of racket, and I thought the audience was goin’ to assault
the stage, but it was merely female against female. Judgment Jones comes
back and kinda tearfully explains that Susie Hightower Potts and Eveline
Annabel Wimple has had a battle, and Susie swears that Eveline and Hank
ain’t goin’ to do no love scenes, except over her dead body.

Hank said he’d talk with her, but he came back pretty soon, nursin’ a
black eye. The audience is plumb impatient, and the committee comes back
to see what’s keepin’ us.

“We’ll give yuh five minutes more,” says Dog-Rib, “and if yuh ain’t
actin’, we declares this here show null and void. We come here to see
actin’, and we’ll see it to our fullest capacity or take our money
back.”

Then they single-files out again. Judgment Jones flops his arms and his
face registers ashes-to-ashes, even unto the last ash. Hank rubs his
black eye and ponders deeplike. Pretty soon he says, “There’s jist one
thing to do and that is to jump this show to where them snake-hunters
will see plenty action. We’ll put on the last act and them three
scenes--the kidnappin’, the death of Little Eva and the finish of the
race.”

“But they won’t know what the show is all about, unless we act it all.”

“Let ’em guess at it--that’s what I’ve been doin’. C’mon.”

I’ve decided that I’ve had about enough and starts to walk across the
stage to where I can get out, but all to once I starts walkin’ faster
and faster, but don’t get nowhere. The floor is goin’ out behind me, and
all to once I lands on my chin and rolled over against the wall.

I fans a few stars out of my eyes and looked at Peewee, who humps down
beside me.

“I was wonderin’ if that thing worked,” says he, “and I see it does.”

“What works?”

“That treadmill jigger they made for the horse race. They explains it to
me that we’re all in there, playin’ we’re watchin’ the race, and at the
finish Hank rides Tequila onto that treadmill and the audience can see
everythin’, except the horse’s feet. Then they drop the curtain.”

Oscar Tubbs, “Burlap” Benson and “Fetlock” Feeney, the blacksmith, show
up, and I wonder what they’re the committee for. They talk with Hank,
and then climb up on a two-by-six, which extends across above the stage.
I don’t sabe their idea, unless they want to git above all trouble. Hank
comes to me and takes me up front again.

They’ve got the same room fixed up a little different, and there is
Limpy Lucas settin’ at a table, with a bottle of liquor.

“You go in there,” says Hank. “All you’ve got to do is fool around. In a
little while Zibe will come in with me as his prisoner. You won’t have a
thing to do, until Susie asks yuh to rope both Limpy and Zibe. There’s
ropes back there on the floor. This will be easy for you. Now, go ahead
and we’ll lift the curtain.”

Well, all fools ain’t dead yet; so I went ahead. The curtain went up and
I said, “Limpy, I’m as dry as a lost match in Death Valley.”

“Nigger,” says he, “don’t speak to me. I am Lord Worthington, a scion of
British aristocracy.”

“I dunno what a scion is, but the rest of it’s a lie. You was born down
in Cochise County and yore father was a squawman. Gimme a drink.”

“That’s the stuff!” yells Dog-Rib.

“That’s real actin’.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Jist then in comes Hank and old Zibe.

Hank’s hands are tied behind him, there’s a handkerchief around his
eyes, and Zibe is proddin’ him with a gun. He makes Hank set down in a
chair, and then he turns to Limpy.

“So yo’re here, eh? Playin’ the game my way, eh?”

Limpy begins to wipe his eyes and beller.

“I have been a proud man,” he states emphatic, “but likker brought me to
this. I have bited the hand that fed me. I sold my soul for gin, Simon
Legree. Yes, I will go in with you, even to the depths of hell.”

“Ah, ha-a-a-a-a!” sneers Zibe. “Well, we win, Lord Worthington. Without
Howard Chesterfield that horse never can win--and there sets Howard
Chesterfield. We hold him until after the race. He will be disgraced in
the eyes of his sweetheart, who will marry me. Ah, ha-a-a-a-a!”

I swear I never did see Susie, until there she was on the stage, with a
two-barrel shotgun in her hands, pointin’ it at Zibe.

“Hands up, you foul beast,” says she, and Zibe puts up his hands.

“You think his sweetheart will marry you, Simon Legree? Bah! If you was
the last man in the world, I wouldn’t marry you. Uncle Tom, will you
take ropes and bind these foul vultures?”

Well, I shore tied ’em up tight. Susie took the ropes off Hank and he
stood up straight and looked down at her.

“Thank yuh, Little Eva,” says he. “I heard what yuh said to Legree, and
I hate to disappoint yuh. I’m a fair man, and no falsehood ever passed
my lips. I don’t love you--I love Gwendolyn.”

Susie takes a deep breath, points her nose toward the ceilin’ and says,
“Oh, woe is me, I am undone!”

And then she let loose all holts and went down so hard that she busted
two boards in that floor. Hank puts one hand over his eyes and kinda
staggers around sayin’ “I’ve broken her heart, I’ve broken her heart!”

“Yo’re right!” yells somebody in the audience. “I heard it break, Hank.”

Hank flops his arms and turns to me.

“Uncle Tom, I believe I have killed her. I’ll have to carry her home.”

Hank tried three different holts and they all slipped.

“Damn it, Susie, help yourself a little, can’tcha?” he whispers.

“I’m supposed to be swooned,” she whispers. “Pick me up, you idiot.”

“Git her by the legs, Hozie,” whispers Hank.

“You touch my legs, and I’ll kick yuh loose from the surroundin’
country,” hisses Susie.

Hank straightens up and turns toward the audience.

“Ah, I cannot touch her,” says he. “She looks so peaceful in death.”

Susie took a kick at me and I got away fast. She turned over and got to
her feet, as Hank lifts up both hands and says real loud, “I’ll leave
her here for the angels, while I go to ride for love.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

But he didn’t. Susie socked him one on the back of the neck with a right
swing and he went off the stage into the three-piece orchestra, with
both legs in the air, while the committee stood up and whistled through
their fingers, and somebody had sense enough to yank down the curtain.

The committee brought Hank back with them. He was smiling sweetly, but
as an actor he’s a total loss.

“This here show,” says Dog-Rib, “is kinda jumpy, it seems to me. We’ve
been tryin’ all along to find out what it’s all about. That there last
act was plenty actful, as yuh might say, but we dunno what it was
about.”

I didn’t wait to listen to the argument. Peewee got that bottle they
used in the last act, and we emptied it together. We’re leanin’ up
against a black curtain at the back of the stage, and all to once
somethin’ hit Peewee and knocked him plumb up past the treadmill, where
he landed on his hands and knees.

“Yuh better git away from there, Hozie,” says Limpy. “That racehorse is
behind the curtain.”

We stretched Peewee out on the floor in a corner, and the rest of us are
asked to come out on the stage. They’re all inquirin’ for Miss Wimple.

“She’s gone down to the hotel to git the money,” says Judgment. “She
said, bein’ as the play turned out like it did, she wanted the money out
of her hands; so I told her to bring it up here for a settlement. Her
and Susie had a fight over them love scenes, and she was through up
here.”

“We don’t need her,” says Susie. “If she was actin’ for saw mills, she
wouldn’t git a sliver in her finger. Is everythin’ all set?”

Susie laid down on the floor and Zibe fastened a belt around her. She’s
all dressed in white, with a couple things that might be mistaken for
wings. We all squats down around her. They’ve got a heavy wire ownin’ up
from that belt. Somebody pulled the curtain, and the three-piece
orchestry begins playin’ “Nearer My God to Thee,” kinda soft.

“Uncle Tom,” says Susie, her voice kinda cracked, “I’m goin’ to leave
yuh. I’m goin’ to my place beyond the skies.”

Mrs. Noon begins to blubber.

“Don’t cry,” says Susie. “It’s better this way. Tell Howard that I
forgive him for everythin’. Ah. I hear the angels callin’. Can’t you
hear ’em, Uncle Tom?”

“She’s dyin’,” wails Mrs. Noon.

“Git yore feet braced, Burlap,” says Oscar Tubbs, up there, on that
two-by-six.

“Angel voices,” says Susie. “They’re callin’ me home.”

“Pull, you damn’ fools!” yelps Oscar.

And Little Eva starts on her long trip, as yuh might say. Up and up she
goes, head and feet down, them spangled wings straight up. I’ve allus
had my own idea of an angel, and Susie didn’t fit that idea.

Then the angel stopped and kinda hung there, swingin’ around.

“Keep her goin’!” hisses old Zibe from the side of the stage.

“The angels are takin’ her away,” wails Mrs. Noon.

_Cra-a-a-ack!_

                  *       *       *       *       *

That two-by-six snapped by too much weight, and down comes the handmade
heaven. Susie lit on her head, and here comes Oscar Tubbs, Burlap Benson
and Fetlock Feeney, follered by that busted two-by-six. Oscar lit on his
feet, busted plumb through where Susie had already cracked the boards,
and stopped with only his head in sight.

It shook the whole stage and also the whole danged house. One of
Burlap’s boots hit me in the head, but as my lights went dim, I heard
somebody yellin’, “Three angels gone to hell a’ready, and the fourth one
dropped for reasons knowed to all of us!”

I woke up with Zibe and Zeke Hardy moppin’ me head with cold water, and
I can hear Dog-Rib arguin’ at the top of his voice, “I don’t care a dang
if Hank is still knocked out--we’ll have that there hoss race, or our
money back. You’ve done advertised a race, and we crave a race.”

“But there ain’t no jockey to ride that race,” pleads Judgment. “You can
see for yourself that Hank Potts ain’t fit to ride nothin’.”

“Suit yourself. I’ve done sent a couple men down to the hotel to set on
that safe, where yuh keep the money. Oasis and Alkali towns crave that
horse race; so it’s shore up to you.”

They go stompin’ out, while the crowd out in front makes all kinds of
noise. I sabes them people, and if we don’t give ’em what they want,
they’ll take the hall apart.

“Are you loyal to San Pablo, Hozie?” asks Zeke.

“Look at me and answer yore own question.”

“You’re a good rider. Hozie: ride for the honor of San Pablo. Never let
Oasis say that we didn’t make good. Yo’re the man of the hour--the best
rider in the San Pablo range. Think of poor old Judgment Jones and the
starvin’ cannibals he aims to help with that money. Will yuh, Hozie?”

I said I wouldn’t--and swooned. When I woke up. I’ve got on Hank’s
jockey clothes, and they’re helpin’ me on Tequila, that big, cold-jawed,
leg-crossin’ sorrel. The horse is blindfolded, and it takes three men to
hold his head down. The boards are crackin’ under his feet, and the
blamed brute is scared stiff.

To the right of me is a thing like a big window, and in that window is
Susie, Zeke, Zibe, Mrs. Noon, Oscar Tubbs, Burlap Benson and Fetlock
Feeney, and they’re all yelpin’ their heads off, as though they’re
lookin’ at a race, yellin’, “C’mon, Thunderbolt! Come on, Thunderbolt!”

“Let go!” yelps somebody, and they turned Tequila loose.

“Spur him straight ahead, Hozie!” snorts somebody else.

Spur nothin’. The next thing I knowed I was back on his rump, and he was
climbin’ through that window affair, and the next thing I knowed I was
out on his head, with both legs wrapped around his neck, and we’re on
the edge of the stage, facin’ the stampede. The air is full of
sombreros, all sailin’ at us, men are yelpin’, “Whoa! Whoa!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I got one flash of the committee goin’ out the door on the heels of that
stampedin’ mob, when somebody threw a chair, which landed on my head
like a crown. It shore made me see a lot of stars, but I kept my
presence of mind, as Tequila whirled around and went buck-jumpin’
straight to the back of the stage, knockin’ down everythin’ in sight,
with me still out over his ears--and then we hit that treadmill.

Did we go? Man, that Tequila horse never ran so fast in his life. Why,
he never had time to cross his legs. We wasn’t goin’ no place, but we
was sure goin’ fast. Out from a pile of busted lumber I sees Peewee
raise up, his eyes wide at what he sees.

“Can’tcha stop this?” I yells at him. He picks up a busted two-by-four,
staggers over and shoves it down in the treadmill. They told me
afterward that it throwed Peewee plumb against the back of the buildin’,
but it shore stopped the machine.

I’m only about ten feet from the rear of the stage, which is covered
with a black cloth, and this rear of the stage is the front of the room.

_Wham-blam!_ We went off that treadmill like a skyrocket. I hears the
crash of glass, the rippin’ of a cloth, and there I am out over the main
street of San Pablo, two stories high, with nothin’ but air above, below
and on all sides.

I spread my arms like the wings of a turkey buzzard, turned over once
and landed settin’ down on a buckboard seat, which smashed like a egg
under the impact. It also knocked me a little colder than I was, but I
knowed the team busted loose and was runnin’ away. But I didn’t care.
What was one little runaway beside what I’d been through? The rush of
night air was coolin’ to my fevered brow.

And all of a sudden we went high-wide and handsome.
_Rippety-bing-bang-boom!_ There’s a bell ringin’, somethin’ roarin’, and
then I landed on the seat of my pants on the depot platform and almost
skidded into the train, which was ready to move. The team and buckboard
was just leavin’ the other end of the platform.

I’m knocked kinda silly, but I heard a woman scream, as she ran past me
and onto that train. The depot agent’s boots are stickin’ up from behind
a trunk, where the runaway knocked him. I sets there and watches the
train go out of sight. Beside me is a lady’s handbag, jist a little one
with a white handkerchief stickin’ out of it. I put the thing in my
pocket and got to my feet. I say “my feet” merely because they was
hooked onto me. I didn’t have no feelin’ in ’em.

Then I wandered back down the street, stoppin’ now and then to get my
toes pointed right, and finally got to the No-Limit Saloon. For a while
I ain’t recognized, even if I have got most of the enamel knocked off my
face. There’s Judgment Jones, talkin’ with Dog-Rib, and they come over
to look me over.

“It’s all right, Hozie,” says Judgment. “Oasis and Alkali are satisfied
we done our best. Dog-Rib says they expected more action, but I been
tellin’ him it was jist a little rural play. Next time we’ll do
better--I hope. But, take it all in all, we got our money’s worth--but
no money.

“No money,” says he sadly. “Miss Eveline Annabel Wimple, D. T., took it
all and pulled out durin’ the play--we think. Anyway, she ain’t here,
and the money was given to her in the hotel. The hotel keeper said she
was in a big hurry, and she put the money in her handbag. Now, we’re
goin’ to raffle the racehorse--if he’s still alive.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I found Peewee settin’ on the sidewalk, and we went home. He’s so bent
out of shape that his saddle don’t fit him, but we got back to the HP
ranch and found the horse liniment. After the first or second deluge, I
said to him, “Peewee, that Wimple woman got away with the money.”

“Did she? Good for her.”

“You don’t believe in stealin’, do yuh, Peewee?”

“Not stealin’--takin’.”

“If somebody happened to find her handbag and kept the money, would that
be stealin’?”

“Finder’s keepers.”

I tosses the handbag on the table, and Peewee goggles at it. He don’t
ask no questions. That’s what I like about Peewee. After while he blinks
one of his purple eyes, the other one bein’ shut tight, and says,
“Thinkin’ it over, Hozie. I’m wonderin’.”

He opens the bag and there’s a envelope, folded in the middle; and we
can feel the money inside--paper money. On it is written: _Funds of The
Curse of Drink_. It’s Judgment Jones’s writin’. Peewee shakes his head.

“We can’t do it, Hozie. Old Judgment is the most honest man on earth. He
needs that money for the heathen. I could never look him in the face
again. He wouldn’t do wrong to anybody, and he needs that money. He
trusted that woman, jist like he trusts everybody. Why, he’d even trust
me and you.”

“That’s right,” says I. “We’ll give it back.”

But I wanted to see how much money they took in for that show; so I
steamed the envelope open and dumped it out. I looked at Peewee and he
looked at me. Money? Nothin’ but a lot of old newspaper, cut to the size
of bills. We sets there and does a lot of thinkin’, and after while
Peewee dumps the whole works into the stove.

And as far as we know, the heathen are in jist the same shape they were
before we put on this show. Peewee wanted to be a contortionist, and for
once in his life he got tied in a knot. Peewee’s satisfied. Hank’s
satisfied, but Susie ain’t; she wanted to go all the way to heaven. I’m
satisfied--that a cowpuncher ought to keep off every kind of a stage,
except one with four wheels.

Susie says it’s too bad we were obliged to miss the moral of her play,
but I said I didn’t.

“What was the moral?” she asks.

“Don’t kill yore jockey before the race starts,” says I.

And I’m right, too.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the April 10, 1929 issue of
Short Stories magazine.]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CURSE OF DRINK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


